2/4/2015

Myocardial Infarction
Christopher P. Cannon; Eugene Braunwald

Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 18e >
Chapter 244. Unstable Angina and
Non-ST-Segment Elevation

Unstable Angina and INon-ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial
Infarction: Introduction
Patients with ischemic heart disease fall into two large groups: patients with chronic coronary artery disease (CAD)
who most commonly present with stable angina (Chap. 243) and patients with acute coronary syndromes (ACSs).
The latter group, in turn, is composed of patients with acute myocardial infarction (MI) with ST-segment elevation
on their presenting electrocardiogram (ECG) (STEMI; Chap. 245) and those with unstable angina (UA) and non-ST-
segment elevation MI (UA/NSTEMI; Fig. 245-1). Every year in the United States, approximately 1 million patients
are admitted to hospitals with UA/NSTEMI as compared with 300,000 patients with acute STEMI. The relative
incidence of UA/NSTEMI compared to STEMI appears to be increasing. More than one-third of patients with
UA/NSTEMI are women, while less than one-fourth of patients with STEMI are women.
Denition
The diagnosis of UA is based largely on the clinical presentation. Stable angina pectoris is characterized by chest
or arm discomfort that may not be described as pain but is reproducibly associated with physical exertion or stress
and is relieved within 510 minutes by rest and/or sublingual nitroglycerin (Chaps. 12 and 343). UA is defined as
angina pectoris or equivalent ischemic discomfort with at least one of three features: (1) it occurs at rest (or with
minimal exertion), usually lasting >10 minutes; (2) it is severe and of new onset (i.e., within the prior 46 weeks);
and/or (3) it occurs with a crescendo pattern (i.e., distinctly more severe, prolonged, or frequent than previously).
The diagnosis of NSTEMI is established if a patient with the clinical features of UA develops evidence of
myocardial necrosis, as reflected in elevated cardiac biomarkers.
Pathophysiology
UA/NSTEMI is most commonly caused by a reduction in oxygen supply and/or by an increase in myocardial
oxygen demand superimposed on a lesion that causes coronary arterial obstruction, usually an atherothrombotic
coronary plaque. Four pathophysiologic processes that may contribute to the development of UA/NSTEMI have
been identified: (1) plaque rupture or erosion with a superimposed nonocclusive thrombus, believed to be the most
common cause; in such patients, NSTEMI may occur with downstream embolization of platelet aggregates and/or
atherosclerotic debris; (2) dynamic obstruction [e.g., coronary spasm, as in Prinzmetal's variant angina (PVA) (p.
2020)]; (3) progressive mechanical obstruction [e.g., rapidly advancing coronary atherosclerosis or restenosis
following percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)]; and (4) UA secondary to increased myocardial oxygen
demand and/or decreased supply (e.g., tachycardia, anemia). More than one of these processes may be involved.
Among patients with UA/NSTEMI studied at angiography, approximately 5% have stenosis of the left main
coronary artery, 15% have three-vessel CAD, 30% have two-vessel disease, 40% have single-vessel disease, and
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022
1/14

2/4/2015
10% have no apparent critical epicardial coronary artery stenosis; some of the latter may have obstruction of the
coronary microcirculation. The "culprit lesion" may show an eccentric stenosis with scalloped or overhanging
edges and a narrow neck on angiography. Angioscopy has been reported to show "white" (platelet-rich) thrombi,
as opposed to "red" (fibrin- and cell-rich) thrombi; the latter are more often seen in patients with acute STEMI.
Patients with UA/NSTEMI frequently have multiple plaques at risk of disruption (vulnerable plaques).
Clinical Presentation
History and Physical Examination
The clinical hallmark of UA/NSTEMI is chest pain, typically located in the substernal region or sometimes in the
epigastrium, that radiates to the neck, left shoulder, and/or the left arm (Chap. 12). This discomfort is usually
severe enough to be described as frank pain. Anginal "equivalents" such as dyspnea and epigastric discomfort
may also occur, and these appear to be more frequent in women. The physical examination resembles that in
patients with stable angina (Chap. 243) and may be unremarkable. If the patient has a large area of myocardial
ischemia or a large NSTEMI, the physical findings can include diaphoresis; pale, cool skin; sinus tachycardia; a
third and/or fourth heart sound; basilar rales; and, sometimes, hypotension, resembling the findings of large
STEMI.
Electrocardiogram
In UA, ST-segment depression, transient ST-segment elevation, and/or T-wave inversion occur in 30 to 50% of
patients. In patients with the clinical features of UA, the presence of new ST-segment deviation, even of only 0.05
mV, is an important predictor of adverse outcome. T-wave changes are sensitive for ischemia but less specific,
unless they are new, deep T-wave inversions (0.3 mV).
Cardiac Biomarkers
Patients with UA/NSTEMI who have elevated biomarkers of necrosis, such as CK-MB and troponin (a much more
specific and sensitive marker of myocardial necrosis), are at increased risk for death or recurrent MI. Elevated
levels of these markers distinguish patients with NSTEMI from those with UA. There is a direct relationship
between the degree of troponin elevation and mortality. However, in patients without a clear clinical history of
myocardial ischemia, minor troponin elevations have been reported and can be caused by congestive heart failure
(CHF), myocarditis, or pulmonary embolism, or they may be false-positive readings. Thus, in patients with an
unclear history, small troponin elevations may not be diagnostic of an ACS.
Diagnostic Evaluation
(See also Chap. 12) Approximately six million persons per year in the United States present to hospital emergency
departments (EDs) with a complaint of chest pain or other symptoms suggestive of ACS. A diagnosis of an ACS is
established in 20 to 25% of such patients. The first step in evaluating patients with possible UA/NSTEMI is to
determine the likelihood that CAD is the cause of the presenting symptoms. The American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) Guidelines include, among the factors associated with a high
likelihood of ACS, a prior history typical of stable angina, a history of established CAD by angiography, prior MI,
CHF, new ECG changes, or elevated cardiac biomarkers.
Diagnostic Pathways
Four major diagnostic tools are used in the diagnosis of UA/NSTEMI in the ED: clinical history, the ECG, cardiac
markers, and stress testing (coronary imaging is an emerging option). The goals are to: (1) recognize or exclude MI
(using cardiac markers), (2) evaluate for rest ischemia (using serial or continuous ECGs), and (3) evaluate for
significant CAD (using provocative stress testing). Patients with a low likelihood of ischemia are usually managed
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

2/14

2/4/2015
with an ED-based critical pathway (which, in some institutions, is carried out in a "chest-pain unit" Fig. 244-1).
Evaluation of such patients includes clinical monitoring for recurrent ischemic discomfort, serial ECGs, and cardiac
markers, typically obtained at baseline and at 46 h and 12 h after presentation. If new elevations in cardiac
markers or ECG changes are noted, the patient should be admitted to the hospital. If the patient remains pain free
and the markers are negative, the patient may proceed to stress testing. CT angiography is used with increasing
frequency to exclude obstructive CAD (Chap. 229).
FIGURE 244-1

Algorithm for risk stratification and treatment of patients with suspected coronary artery disease. Using the clinical
history of the type of pain and medical history, the ECG, and cardiac markers, one can identify patients who have a
low likelihood of UA/NSTEMI, for whom a diagnostic "ruleout myocardial infarction (MI) or acute coronary
syndrome (ACS)" is warranted. If this is negative, the patient may be discharged, but if positive, the patient is
admitted and treated for UA/NSTEMI. On the other end of the spectrum, patients with acute ongoing pain and ST-
segment elevation are treated with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or fibrinolysis (Chap. 245). For those
with UA/NSTEMI, risk stratification is used to identify patients at medium to high risk, for whom an early invasive
strategy is warranted. Antithrombotic therapy should include aspirin, an anticoagulant, an ADP antagonist
(clopidogrel or prasugrel), with GP IIb/IIIa inhibition considered for use during PCI. For patients at low risk,
treatment with aspirin, clopidogrel, an anticoagulant such as unfractionated or low molecularweight heparin
(LMWH) or fondaparinux and anti-ischemic therapy with beta blockers and nitrates, and a conservative strategy are
indicated. ASA, aspirin; DM, diabetes mellitus; ECG, electrocardiogram; MI, myocardial infarction; Rx, treatment;
STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. (Adapted from CP Cannon, E Braunwald, in Braunwald's Heart
Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 9th ed, R Bonow et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2011.)
Risk Stratication and Prognosis

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

3/14

2/4/2015
Patients with documented UA/NSTEMI exhibit a wide spectrum of early (30 days) risk of death, ranging from 1 to
10%, and of new or recurrent infarction of 35% or recurrent ACS (5-15%). Assessment of risk can be
accomplished by clinical risk scoring systems such as that developed from the Thrombolysis in Myocardial
Infarction (TIMI) Trials, which includes seven independent risk factors: age  65 years, three or more risk factors for
CAD, documented CAD at catheterization, development of UA/NSTEMI while on aspirin, more than two episodes
of angina within the preceding 24 h, ST deviation 0.5 mm, and an elevated cardiac marker (Fig. 244-2). Other risk
factors include diabetes mellitus, left ventricular dysfunction, renal dysfunction and elevated levels of brain
natriuretic peptides and C-reactive protein. Multimarker strategies involving several biomarkers are now gaining
favor, both to define more fully the pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying a given patient's presentation and to
stratify the patient's risk further. Early risk assessment (especially using troponin, ST-segment changes, and/or a
global risk-scoring system) is useful both in predicting the risk of recurrent cardiac events and in identifying those
patients who would derive the greatest benefit from antithrombotic therapies more potent than unfractionated
heparin, such as low molecularweight heparin (LMWH) and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, and from an early
invasive strategy. For example, in the TACTICS-TIMI 18 Trial, an early invasive strategy conferred a 40% reduction
in recurrent cardiac events in patients with a positive troponin level, whereas no benefit was observed in those
without detectable troponin.
FIGURE 244-2

The TIMI Risk Score for UA/NSTEMI, a simple but comprehensive clinical risk stratification score to identify
increasing risk of death, myocardial infarction, or urgent revascularization to day 14. CAD, coronary artery disease;
ASA, aspirin. (Adapted from Antman et al.)
Treatment: Unstable Angina and Non-ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction
Medical Treatment
Patients with UA/NSTEMI should be placed at bed rest with continuous ECG monitoring for ST-segment deviation
and cardiac arrhythmias. Ambulation is permitted if the patient shows no recurrence of ischemia (discomfort or
ECG changes) and does not develop a biomarker of necrosis for 1224 h. Medical therapy involves simultaneous
anti-ischemic treatment and antithrombotic treatment.
Anti-Ischemic Treatment

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

4/14

2/4/2015
(Table 244-1) To provide relief and prevention of recurrence of chest pain, initial treatment should include bed rest,
nitrates, and beta blockers.
Table 2441. Drugs Commonly Used in Intensive Medical Management of Patients with Unstable Angina and Non-
ST Segment Elevation MI
Drug
Category Clinical Condition

Dosage

When to
Avoida

Nitrates

Administer sublingually, and,
if symptoms persist,
intravenously

Beta
blockersb Unstable angina

Patients whose symptoms
are not relieved by adequate
doses of nitrates and beta
blockers, or in patients
unable to tolerate adequate

Calcium
channel
blockers

Topical, oral, or buccal nitrates
are acceptable alternatives for
patients without ongoing or
refractory symptoms
510 g/min by continuous
infusion titrated up to 75100
g/min until relief of symptoms or
limiting side effects (headache or
hypotension with a systolic blood
pressure<90 mmHg or more than
30% below starting mean arterial
pressure levels if significant
hypertension is present)

Metoprolol 2550 mg by mouth
every 6 h
If needed, and no heart failure, 5-
mg increments by slow (over 12
min)
IV administration

Dependent on specific agent

Hypotension
Patient
receiving
sildenafil or
other PDE-5
inhibitor

PR interval
(ECG)
>0.24 s
2° or 3°
atrioventricular
block
Heart rate <60
beats/min
Systolic
pressure <90
mmHg
Shock
Left ventricular
failure
Severe
reactive airway
disease

Pulmonary
edema
Evidence of
left ventricular
dysfunction

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

5/14

2/4/2015

Morphine
sulfate

doses of one or both of these
agents, or in patients with
variant angina

(for diltiazem
or verapamil)

Patients whose symptoms
are not relieved after three
serial sublingual nitroglycerin
tablets or whose symptoms
recur with adequate anti-
ischemic therapy

Hypotension
Respiratory
depression
Confusion
Obtundation

25 mg IV dose
May be repeated every 530 min
as needed to relieve symptoms
and maintain patient comfort

aAllergy or prior intolerance is a contraindication for all categories of drugs
listed in this chart.
bChoice of the specific agent is not as important as ensuring that
appropriate candidates receive this therapy. If there are concerns about
patient intolerance owing to existing pulmonary disease, especially asthma,
left ventricular dysfunction, risk of hypotension or severe bradycardia, initial
selection should favor a short-acting agent, such as propranolol or
metoprolol or the ultra-short-acting agent esmolol. Mild wheezing or a
history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease should prompt a trial of a
short-acting agent at a reduced dose (e.g., 2.5 mg IV metoprolol, 12.5 mg
oral metoprolol, or 25 g/kg per min esmolol as initial doses) rather than
complete avoidance of beta-blocker therapy.
Note: Some of the recommendations in this guide suggest the use of agents
for purposes or in doses other than those specified by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration. Such recommendations are made after consideration
of concerns regarding nonapproved indications. Where made, such
recommendations are based on more recent clinical trials or expert

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

6/14

2/4/2015
consensus. IV, intravenous; ECG, electrocardiogram; 2°, second-degree; 3°,
third-degree.
Source: Modified from E Braunwald et al: Circulation 90:613, 1994.

Nitrates
Nitrates should first be given sublingually or by buccal spray (0.30.6 mg) if the patient is experiencing ischemic
pain. If pain persists after 3 doses given 5 min apart, intravenous nitroglycerin (510 g/min using nonabsorbing
tubing) is recommended. The rate of the infusion may be increased by 10 g/min every 35 min until symptoms are
relieved or systolic arterial pressure falls to <100 mmHg. Topical or oral nitrates (Chap. 243) can be used once the
pain has resolved or they may replace intravenous nitroglycerin when the patient has been pain-free for 1224 h.
The only absolute contraindications to the use of nitrates are hypotension or the use of sildenafil or other drugs in
that class within the previous 2448 h.
Beta Adrenergic Blockers and Other Agents
Beta blockers are the other mainstay of anti-ischemic treatment. Oral beta blockade targeted to a heart rate of 50
60 beats/min is recommended as first-line treatment. A caution has been raised in the new ACC/AHA guidelines for
use of intravenous beta blockade in patients with any evidence of acute heart failure, where they could increase
the risk of cardiogenic shock. Heart rateslowing calcium channel blockers, e.g., verapamil or diltiazem, are
recommended for patients who have persistent or recurrent symptoms after treatment with full-dose nitrates and
beta blockers and in patients with contraindications to beta blockade. Additional medical therapy includes
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibition and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) for long-term
secondary prevention. Early administration of intensive statin therapy (e.g., atorvastatin 80 mg) prior to
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) has been shown to reduce complications, suggesting that high-dose
statin therapy should be started at the time of admission.
Antithrombotic Therapy
(Table 244-2) This is the other main component of treatment for UA/NSTEMI. Initial treatment should begin with
the platelet cyclooxygenase inhibitor aspirin(Fig. 244-3). The typical initial dose is 325 mg/d, with lower doses (75
162 mg/d) recommended for long-term therapy. The OASIS-7 trial randomized 25,087 ACS patients to receive
high-dose (300325 mg/d) vs. low-dose (75-100 mg/d) aspirin for 30 days and reported no differences in the risk of
major bleeding or in efficacy over this period of time. "Aspirin resistance" has been noted in 510% of patients and
more frequently in patients treated with lower doses of aspirin, but frequently has been related to noncompliance.
Table 2442. Clinical Use of Antithrombotic Therapy
Oral
Antiplatelet
Therapy

Aspirin

Clopidogrel

Initial dose of 162325 mg nonenteric formulation followed by 75162 mg/d of
an enteric or a nonenteric formulation
Loading dose of 300-600 mg followed by 75 mg/d

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

7/14

2/4/2015

Prasugrel
Intravenous
Antiplatelet
Therapy

Abciximab

Eptifibatide

Tirofiban

Heparins*
Unfractionated
Heparin (UFH)

Enoxaparin

Fondaparinux

Bivalirudin

Pre-PCI: Loading dose 60 mg followed by 10 mg/d

0.25 mg/kg bolus followed by infusion of 0.125 g/kg per min (maximum 10
g/min) for 12 to 24 h
180 g/kg bolus followed by infusion of 2.0 g/kg per min for 72 to 96 h
0.4 g/kg per min for 30 min followed by infusion of 0.1 g/kg per min for 48 to
96 h

Bolus 6070 U/kg (maximum 5000 U) IV followed by infusion of 1215 U/kg per
h (initial maximum 1000 U/h) titrated to a PTT 5070 s
1 mg/kg SC every 12 h; the first dose may be preceded by a 30-mg IV bolus;
renal adjustment to 1 mg/kg once daily if creatine Cl < 30 cc/min
2.5 mg SC qd
Initial bolus intravenous bolus of 0.1 mg/kg and an infusion of 0.25 mg/kg per
hour. Before PCI, an additional intravenous bolus of 0.5 mg/kg was
administered, and the infusion was increased to 1.75 mg/kg per hour.

*Other LMWH exist beyond those listed.
Abbreviations: IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneously.
Source: Modified from J Anderson et al: JACO 50:e1, 2007.

FIGURE 244-3

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

8/14

2/4/2015

Platelets initiate thrombosis at the site of a ruptured plaque with denuded endothelium: platelet adhesion occurs
via (1) the GP 1b receptor in conjunction with von Willebrand factor. This is followed by platelet activation (2), which
leads to a shape change of the platelet, degranulation of the alpha and dense granules, and expression of
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors on the platelet surface with activation of the receptor, such that it can bind
fibrinogen. The final step is platelet aggregation (3), in which fibrinogen (or von Willebrand factor) binds to the
activated GP IIb/IIIa receptors. Aspirin (ASA) and clopidogrel act to decrease platelet activation, whereas the GP
IIb/IIIa inhibitors inhibit the final step of platelet aggregation. GP, glycoprotein. [Modified from CP Cannon, E
Braunwald, in Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 8th ed, R Bonow et al (eds).
Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008.]
The thienopyridine, clopidogrel, an inactive prodrug that is converted into an active metabolite, which blocks the
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

9/14

2/4/2015
platelet P2Y12 component or the adenosine diphosphate receptor, in combination with aspirin, was shown in the
CURE trial to confer a 20% relative reduction in cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke, compared with aspirin alone in
both low- and high-risk patients, but to be associated with a moderate (absolute 1%) increase in major bleeding.
Pretreatment with clopidogrel (a 300 or 600 mg loading dose, followed by 75 mg qd) is recommended prior to PCI.
The OASIS-7 trial reported that one week of a higher dose of clopidogrel (600 mg loading dose and 150 mg/d for
one week) did not result in an overall improvement in outcomes in ACS patients, but did so in patients receiving
325 mg of aspirin, especially those who underwent PCI.
Continued benefit of one year of treatment with the combination of clopidogrel and aspirin has been observed both
in patients treated conservatively and in those who underwent PCI and should certainly continue for at least one
year in patients with a drug-eluting stent. Up to one-third of patients have low response to clopidogrel, and a
substantial proportion of these are related to a genetic variant of the cytochrome P450 system. A variant of the
2C19 gene leads to reduced conversion of clopidogrel into its active metabolite, which, in turn, causes lower
platelet inhibition and a higher risk of cardiovascular events. Alternate agents, such as prasugrel, should be
considered for ACS patients who are hyporesponsive to clopidogrel as identified by platelet and/or genetic testing,
although such testing is not yet widespread.
A recently approved thienopyridine, prasugrel, has been shown to achieve a more rapid onset, and higher level of
platelet inhibition than clopidogrel. It has been used in ACS patients following angiography in whom PCI is planned
at a dose of 60 mg load followed by 10 mg/d for up to 15 months. The TRITON-TIMI 38 trial showed that relative to
clopidogrel, prasugrel reduced the risk of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke significantly by 19%, albeit with an
increase in major bleeding. Stent thrombosis was also reduced by 52%. This agent is contraindicated in patients
with prior stroke or transient ischemic attack. Ticagrelor is a novel, reversible ADP inhibitor that has recently been
reported to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke by 16% compared with clopidogrel in a broad
population of ACS patients. This agent also reduced mortality and did not increase the risk of total bleeding; it is
not yet FDA approved at the time of this writing.
Four options are available for anticoagulant therapy to be added to aspirin and clopidogrel. Unfractionated heparin
(UFH) is the mainstay of therapy. The low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), enoxaparin, has been shown in
several studies to be superior to UFH in reducing recurrent cardiac events, especially in conservatively managed
patients. The indirect Factor Xa inhibitor, fondaparinux, is equivalent for early efficacy compared with enoxaparin
but appears to have a lower risk of major bleeding. Bivalirudin, a direct thrombin inhibitor, is similar in efficacy to
either UFH or LMWH among patients treated with a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor, but use of bivalirudin alone causes less
bleeding than the combination of heparin and a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor in patients with UA/NSTEMI undergoing
catheterization and/or PCI.
Prior to the advent of clopidogrel, many trials had shown the benefit of intravenous GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors. The
benefit, however, has been small, i.e., only a 9% reduction in death or MI, with a significant increase in major
bleeding. Two recent studies also failed to show a benefit for early initiation compared with use only for PCI. The
use of these agents may be reserved for unstable patients with recurrent rest pain and ECG changes who undergo
PCI.
Excessive bleeding is the most important adverse effect of all antithrombotic agents, including anticoagulants and
antiplatelet agents. Therefore, attention must be directed to the doses of antithrombotic agents, accounting for
weight, creatinine clearance, and a previous history of excessive bleeding, as a means of reducing the risk of
bleeding.
Invasive versus Conservative Strategy
Multiple clinical trials have demonstrated the benefit of an early invasive strategy in high-risk patients, i.e., patients

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

10/14

2/4/2015
with multiple clinical risk factors, ST-segment deviation, and/or positive biomarkers (Table 244-3). In this strategy,
following treatment with anti-ischemic and antithrombotic agents, coronary arteriography is carried out within 48
h of admission, followed by coronary revascularization (PCI or coronary artery bypass grafting), depending on the
coronary anatomy.
Table 2443. Class I Recommendations for Use of an Early Invasive Strategy*
Class I (Level of Evidence: A) Indications
Recurrent angina at rest/low-level activity despite Rx
Elevated TnT or TnI
New ST-segment depression
Rec. angina/ischemia with CHF symptoms, rales, MR
Positive stress test
EF < 0.40
Decreased BP
Sustained VT
PCI< 6 months, prior CABG
High-risk score
*Any one of the high-risk indicators.
Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting;
CHF, congestive heart failure; EF, ejection fraction; MR, mitral regurgitation;
PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; Rec, recurrent; TnI, troponin I; TnT,
troponin T; VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Source: J Anderson et al: JACO 50:e1, 2007.

In low-risk patients, the outcomes from an invasive strategy are similar to those obtained from a conservative
strategy, which consists of anti-ischemic and antithrombotic therapy followed by "watchful waiting," and in which
coronary arteriography is carried out only if rest pain or ST-segment changes recur or there is evidence of ischemia
on a stress test.
Long-Term Management
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

11/14

2/4/2015
The time of hospital discharge is a "teachable moment" for the patient with UA/NSTEMI, when the physician can
review and optimize the medical regimen. Risk-factor modification is key, and the caregiver should discuss with
the patient the importance of smoking cessation, achieving optimal weight, daily exercise following an appropriate
diet, blood-pressure control, tight control of hyperglycemia (for diabetic patients), and lipid management, as
recommended for patients with chronic stable angina (Chap. 243).
There is evidence of benefit with long-term therapy with five classes of drugs that are directed at different
components of the atherothrombotic process. Beta blockers, statins (at a high dose, e.g., atorvastatin 80 mg/d),
and ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers are recommended for long-term plaque stabilization.
Antiplatelet therapy, now recommended to be the combination of aspirin and clopidogrel (or prasugrel in post PCS
patients) for one year, with aspirin continued thereafter, prevents or reduces the severity of any thrombosis that
would occur if a plaque were to rupture.
Observational registries have shown that patients with UA/NSTEMI at high risk, including women and the elderly as
well as racial minorities, are less likely to receive evidence-based pharmacologic and interventional therapies with
resultant poorer clinical outcomes and quality of life.
Prinzmetal's Variant Angina
In 1959 Prinzmetal et al. described a syndrome of severe ischemic pain that occurs at rest but not usually with
exertion and is associated with transient ST-segment elevation. This syndrome is due to focal spasm of an
epicardial coronary artery, leading to severe myocardial ischemia. The cause of the spasm is not well defined, but
it may be related to hypercontractility of vascular smooth muscle due to vasoconstrictor mitogens, leukotrienes, or
serotonin.
Clinical and Angiographic Manifestations
Patients with Prinzmetal's variant angina (PVA) are generally younger and have fewer coronary risk factors (with the
exception of cigarette smoking) than patients with UA secondary to coronary atherosclerosis. Cardiac examination
is usually unremarkable in the absence of ischemia. The clinical diagnosis of variant angina is made with the
detection of transient ST-segment elevation with rest pain. Many patients also exhibit multiple episodes of
asymptomatic ST-segment elevation (silent ischemia). Small elevations of troponin may occur in patients with
prolonged attacks of variant angina.
Coronary angiography demonstrates transient coronary spasm as the diagnostic hallmark of PVA. Atherosclerotic
plaques, which do not usually cause critical obstruction, in at least one proximal coronary artery occur in the
majority of patients, and in them spasm usually occurs within 1 cm of the plaque. Focal spasm is most common in
the right coronary artery, and it may occur at one or more sites in one artery or in multiple arteries simultaneously.
Ergonovine, acetylcholine, other vasoconstrictor medications, and hyperventilation have been used to provoke
focal coronary stenosis on angiography to establish the diagnosis. Hyperventilation has also been used to provoke
rest angina, ST-segment elevation, and spasm on coronary arteriography.
Treatment: Prinzmetal's Variant Angina
Nitrates and calcium channel blockers are the main agents used to treat acute episodes and to abolish recurrent
episodes of PVA. Aspirin may actually increase the severity of ischemic episodes, possibly as a result of the
exquisite sensitivity of coronary tone to modest changes in the synthesis of prostacyclin. The response to beta
blockers is variable. Coronary revascularization may be helpful in patients who also have discrete, proximal fixed
obstructive lesions.
Prognosis

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

12/14

2/4/2015
Many patients with PVA pass through an acute, active phase, with frequent episodes of angina and cardiac events
during the first 6 months after presentation. Long-term survival at 5 years is excellent (9095%). Patients with no
or mild fixed coronary obstruction tend to experience a more benign course than do patients with associated
severe obstructive lesions. Nonfatal MI occurs in up to 20% of patients by 5 years. Patients with PVA who develop
serious arrhythmias during spontaneous episodes of pain are at a higher risk for sudden cardiac death. In most
patients who survive an infarction or the initial 3- to 6-month period of frequent episodes, the condition stabilizes,
and there is a tendency for symptoms and cardiac events to diminish over time.
Further Readings
Alexander KP et al: Excess dosing of antiplatelet and antithrombin agents in the treatment of non-ST-segment
elevation acute coronary syndromes. JAMA 294:3108, 2005  [PubMed: 16380591] 
Anderson JL et al: ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines for the management of patients with unstable angina/non-ST-
elevation myocardial infarction: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation 116:e148, 2007 
Antman EM et al: The TIMI risk score for unstable angina/non-ST elevation MI: A method for prognostication and
therapeutic decision-making. JAMA 284:835, 2000  [PubMed: 10938172] 
Cannon CP, Braunwald E: Unstable angina, in Braunwald's Heart Disease, 9th ed, R Bonow et al (eds).
Philadelphia, Saunders, 2011 
Cannon CP et al: Intensive versus moderate lipid lowering with statins after acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J
Med 350:1495, 2004  [PubMed: 15007110] 
Giugliano RP et al: Early versus delayed, provisional eptifibatide in acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med
360:2176, 2009  [PubMed: 19332455] 
O'Donoghue M et al: Early invasive vs. conservative treatment strategies in women and men with unstable angina
and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis. JAMA 300:71, 2008  [PubMed: 18594042] 
Wallentin LT et al: Ticagrelor versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med
361:1045, 2009  [PubMed: 19717846] 
Wiviott SD et al: Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 357:2001,
2007  [PubMed: 17982182] 

Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC.

All rights reserved.

Your IP address is 146.203.126.89

Algorithm for risk stratification and treatment of patients with suspected coronary artery disease. Using the clinical
history of the type of pain and medical history, the ECG, and cardiac markers, one can identify patients who have a
low likelihood of UA/NSTEMI, for whom a diagnostic "ruleout myocardial infarction (MI) or acute coronary
syndrome (ACS)" is warranted. If this is negative, the patient may be discharged, but if positive, the patient is
admitted and treated for UA/NSTEMI. On the other end of the spectrum, patients with acute ongoing pain and ST-
segment elevation are treated with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or fibrinolysis (Chap. 245). For those
with UA/NSTEMI, risk stratification is used to identify patients at medium to high risk, for whom an early invasive
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

13/14

2/4/2015
strategy is warranted. Antithrombotic therapy should include aspirin, an anticoagulant, an ADP antagonist
(clopidogrel or prasugrel), with GP IIb/IIIa inhibition considered for use during PCI. For patients at low risk,
treatment with aspirin, clopidogrel, an anticoagulant such as unfractionated or low molecularweight heparin
(LMWH) or fondaparinux and anti-ischemic therapy with beta blockers and nitrates, and a conservative strategy are
indicated. ASA, aspirin; DM, diabetes mellitus; ECG, electrocardiogram; MI, myocardial infarction; Rx, treatment;
STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. (Adapted from CP Cannon, E Braunwald, in Braunwald's Heart
Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 9th ed, R Bonow et al (eds). Philadelphia, Saunders, 2011.)
The TIMI Risk Score for UA/NSTEMI, a simple but comprehensive clinical risk stratification score to identify
increasing risk of death, myocardial infarction, or urgent revascularization to day 14. CAD, coronary artery disease;
ASA, aspirin. (Adapted from Antman et al.)
Platelets initiate thrombosis at the site of a ruptured plaque with denuded endothelium: platelet adhesion occurs
via (1) the GP 1b receptor in conjunction with von Willebrand factor. This is followed by platelet activation (2), which
leads to a shape change of the platelet, degranulation of the alpha and dense granules, and expression of
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptors on the platelet surface with activation of the receptor, such that it can bind
fibrinogen. The final step is platelet aggregation (3), in which fibrinogen (or von Willebrand factor) binds to the
activated GP IIb/IIIa receptors. Aspirin (ASA) and clopidogrel act to decrease platelet activation, whereas the GP
IIb/IIIa inhibitors inhibit the final step of platelet aggregation. GP, glycoprotein. [Modified from CP Cannon, E
Braunwald, in Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 8th ed, R Bonow et al (eds).
Philadelphia, Saunders, 2008.]

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727022

14/14


