2/4/2015

Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 18e >
Chapter 245. ST-Segment Elevation
Myocardial Infarction

Elliott M. Antman; Joseph Loscalzo

ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction: Introduction
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is one of the most common diagnoses in hospitalized patients in industrialized
countries. In the United States, approximately 650,000 patients experience a new AMI and 450,000 experience a
recurrent AMI each year. The early (30-day) mortality rate from AMI is 30%, with more than half of these deaths
occurring before the stricken individual reaches the hospital. Although the mortality rate after admission for AMI
has declined by 30% over the past two decades, approximately 1 of every 25 patients who survives the initial
hospitalization dies in the first year after AMI. Mortality is approximately fourfold higher in elderly patients (over age
75) as compared with younger patients.
When patients with prolonged ischemic discomfort at rest are first seen, the working clinical diagnosis is that they
are suffering from an acute coronary syndrome(Fig. 245-1). The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) is a pivotal
diagnostic and triage tool because it is at the center of the decision pathway for management; it permits distinction
of those patients presenting with ST-segment elevation from those presenting without ST-segment elevation.
Serum cardiac biomarkers are obtained to distinguish unstable angina (UA) from non-ST-segment MI (NSTEMI)
and to assess the magnitude of an ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI). This chapter focuses on the evaluation and
management of patients with STEMI, while Chapter 244 discusses UA/NSTEMI.
FIGURE 245-1

Acute coronary syndromes. Following disruption of a vulnerable plaque, patients experience ischemic discomfort
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023
1/29

2/4/2015
resulting from a reduction of flow through the affected epicardial coronary artery. The flow reduction may be
caused by a completely occlusive thrombus (right) or subtotally occlusive thrombus (left). Patients with ischemic
discomfort may present with or without ST-segment elevation. Of patients with ST-segment elevation, the majority
(wide red arrow) ultimately develop a Q wave on the ECG (QwMI), while a minority (thin red arrow) do not develop
Q wave and, in older literature, were said to have sustained a non-Q-wave MI (NQMI). Patients who present
without ST-segment elevation are suffering from either unstable angina or a non-ST-segment elevation MI
(NSTEMI) (wide green arrows), a distinction that is ultimately made on the presence or absence of a serum cardiac
marker such as CKMB or a cardiac troponin detected in the blood. The majority of patients presenting with
NSTEMI do not develop a Q wave on the ECG; a minority develop a QwMI (thin green arrow). (Adapted from CW
Hamm et al: Lancet 358:1533, 2001, and MJ Davies: Heart 83:361, 2000; with permission from the BMJ Publishing
Group.)
Pathophysiology: Role of Acute Plaque Rupture
STEMI usually occurs when coronary blood flow decreases abruptly after a thrombotic occlusion of a coronary
artery previously affected by atherosclerosis. Slowly developing, high-grade coronary artery stenoses do not
typically precipitate STEMI because of the development of a rich collateral network over time. Instead, STEMI
occurs when a coronary artery thrombus develops rapidly at a site of vascular injury. This injury is produced or
facilitated by factors such as cigarette smoking, hypertension, and lipid accumulation. In most cases, STEMI
occurs when the surface of an atherosclerotic plaque becomes disrupted (exposing its contents to the blood) and
conditions (local or systemic) favor thrombogenesis. A mural thrombus forms at the site of plaque disruption, and
the involved coronary artery becomes occluded. Histologic studies indicate that the coronary plaques prone to
disruption are those with a rich lipid core and a thin fibrous cap (Chap. 241). After an initial platelet monolayer
forms at the site of the disrupted plaque, various agonists (collagen, ADP, epinephrine, serotonin) promote platelet
activation. After agonist stimulation of platelets, thromboxane A2 (a potent local vasoconstrictor) is released,
further platelet activation occurs, and potential resistance to fibrinolysis develops.
In addition to the generation of thromboxane A2, activation of platelets by agonists promotes a conformational
change in the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor (Chap. 115). Once converted to its functional state, this receptor
develops a high affinity for soluble adhesive proteins (i.e., integrins) such as fibrinogen. Since fibrinogen is a
multivalent molecule, it can bind to two different platelets simultaneously, resulting in platelet cross-linking and
aggregation.
The coagulation cascade is activated on exposure of tissue factor in damaged endothelial cells at the site of the
disrupted plaque. Factors VII and X are activated, ultimately leading to the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin,
which then converts fibrinogen to fibrin (Chap. 116). Fluid-phase and clot-bound thrombin participate in an
autoamplification reaction leading to further activation of the coagulation cascade. The culprit coronary artery
eventually becomes occluded by a thrombus containing platelet aggregates and fibrin strands.
In rare cases, STEMI may be due to coronary artery occlusion caused by coronary emboli, congenital
abnormalities, coronary spasm, and a wide variety of systemicparticularly inflammatorydiseases. The amount
of myocardial damage caused by coronary occlusion depends on (1) the territory supplied by the affected vessel,
(2) whether or not the vessel becomes totally occluded, (3) the duration of coronary occlusion, (4) the quantity of
blood supplied by collateral vessels to the affected tissue, (5) the demand for oxygen of the myocardium whose
blood supply has been suddenly limited, (6) endogenous factors that can produce early spontaneous lysis of the
occlusive thrombus, and (7) the adequacy of myocardial perfusion in the infarct zone when flow is restored in the
occluded epicardial coronary artery.
Patients at increased risk for developing STEMI include those with multiple coronary risk factors (Chap. 241) and
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

2/29

2/4/2015
those with unstable angina (Chap. 244). Less common underlying medical conditions predisposing patients to
STEMI include hypercoagulability, collagen vascular disease, cocaine abuse, and intracardiac thrombi or masses
that can produce coronary emboli.
There have been major advances in the management of STEMI with recognition that the "chain of survival" involves
a highly integrated system starting with prehospital care and extending to early hospital management so as to
provide expeditious implementation of a reperfusion strategy.
Clinical Presentation
In up to one-half of cases, a precipitating factor appears to be present before STEMI, such as vigorous physical
exercise, emotional stress, or a medical or surgical illness. Although STEMI may commence at any time of the day
or night, circadian variations have been reported such that clusters are seen in the morning within a few hours of
awakening.
Pain is the most common presenting complaint in patients with STEMI. The pain is deep and visceral; adjectives
commonly used to describe it are heavy, squeezing, and crushing, although, occasionally, it is described as
stabbing or burning (Chap. 12). It is similar in character to the discomfort of angina pectoris (Chap. 243) but
commonly occurs at rest, is usually more severe, and lasts longer. Typically, the pain involves the central portion of
the chest and/or the epigastrium, and, on occasion, it radiates to the arms. Less common sites of radiation include
the abdomen, back, lower jaw, and neck. The frequent location of the pain beneath the xiphoid and epigastrium
and the patients' denial that they may be suffering a heart attack are chiefly responsible for the common mistaken
impression of indigestion. The pain of STEMI may radiate as high as the occipital area but not below the umbilicus.
It is often accompanied by weakness, sweating, nausea, vomiting, anxiety, and a sense of impending doom. The
pain may commence when the patient is at rest, but when it begins during a period of exertion, it does not usually
subside with cessation of activity, in contrast to angina pectoris.
The pain of STEMI can simulate pain from acute pericarditis (Chap. 239), pulmonary embolism (Chap. 262), acute
aortic dissection (Chap. 248), costochondritis, and gastrointestinal disorders. These conditions should therefore be
considered in the differential diagnosis. Radiation of discomfort to the trapezius is not seen in patients with STEMI
and may be a useful distinguishing feature that suggests pericarditis is the correct diagnosis. However, pain is not
uniformly present in patients with STEMI. The proportion of painless STEMIs is greater in patients with diabetes
mellitus, and it increases with age. In the elderly, STEMI may present as sudden-onset breathlessness, which may
progress to pulmonary edema. Other less common presentations, with or without pain, include sudden loss of
consciousness, a confusional state, a sensation of profound weakness, the appearance of an arrhythmia, evidence
of peripheral embolism, or merely an unexplained drop in arterial pressure.
Physical Findings
Most patients are anxious and restless, attempting unsuccessfully to relieve the pain by moving about in bed,
altering their position, and stretching. Pallor associated with perspiration and coolness of the extremities occurs
commonly. The combination of substernal chest pain persisting for >30 min and diaphoresis strongly suggests
STEMI. Although many patients have a normal pulse rate and blood pressure within the first hour of STEMI, about
one-fourth of patients with anterior infarction have manifestations of sympathetic nervous system hyperactivity
(tachycardia and/or hypertension), and up to one-half with inferior infarction show evidence of parasympathetic
hyperactivity (bradycardia and/or hypotension).
The precordium is usually quiet, and the apical impulse may be difficult to palpate. In patients with anterior wall
infarction, an abnormal systolic pulsation caused by dyskinetic bulging of infarcted myocardium may develop in
the periapical area within the first days of the illness and then may resolve. Other physical signs of ventricular
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

3/29

2/4/2015
dysfunction include fourth and third heart sounds, decreased intensity of the first heart sound, and paradoxical
splitting of the second heart sound (Chap. 227). A transient midsystolic or late systolic apical systolic murmur due
to dysfunction of the mitral valve apparatus may be present. A pericardial friction rub is heard in many patients with
transmural STEMI at some time in the course of the disease, if the patients are examined frequently. The carotid
pulse is often decreased in volume, reflecting reduced stroke volume. Temperature elevations up to 38°C may be
observed during the first week after STEMI. The arterial pressure is variable; in most patients with transmural
infarction, systolic pressure declines by approximately 1015 mmHg from the preinfarction state.
Laboratory Findings
Myocardial infarction (MI) progresses through the following temporal stages: (1) acute (first few hours7 days), (2)
healing (728 days), and (3) healed (29 days). When evaluating the results of diagnostic tests for STEMI, the
temporal phase of the infarction must be considered. The laboratory tests of value in confirming the diagnosis may
be divided into four groups: (1) ECG, (2) serum cardiac biomarkers, (3) cardiac imaging, and (4) nonspecific indices
of tissue necrosis and inflammation.
Electrocardiogram
The electrocardiographic manifestations of STEMI are described in Chap. 228. During the initial stage, total
occlusion of an epicardial coronary artery produces ST-segment elevation. Most patients initially presenting with
ST-segment elevation ultimately evolve Q waves on the ECG. However, Q waves in the leads overlying the infarct
zone may vary in magnitude and even appear only transiently, depending on the reperfusion status of the ischemic
myocardium and restoration of transmembrane potentials over time. A small proportion of patients initially
presenting with ST-segment elevation will not develop Q waves when the obstructing thrombus is not totally
occlusive, obstruction is transient, or if a rich collateral network is present. Among patients presenting with
ischemic discomfort but without ST-segment elevation, if a serum cardiac biomarker of necrosis (see below) is
detected, the diagnosis of NSTEMI is ultimately made (Fig. 245-1). A minority of patients who present initially
without ST-segment elevation may develop a Q-wave MI. Previously, it was believed that transmural MI is present
if the ECG demonstrates Q waves or loss of R waves, and nontransmural MI may be present if the ECG shows only
transient ST-segment and T-wave changes. However, electrocardiographic-pathologic correlations are far from
perfect and terms such as Q-wave MI, non-Q-wave MI, transmural MI, and nontransmural MI, have been replaced
by STEMI and NSTEMI (Fig. 245-1). Contemporary studies using MRI suggest that the development of a Q wave
on the ECG is more dependent on the volume of infarcted tissue rather than the transmurality of infarction.
Serum Cardiac Biomarkers
Certain proteins, called serum cardiac biomarkers, are released from necrotic heart muscle after STEMI. The rate
of liberation of specific proteins differs depending on their intracellular location, their molecular weight, and the
local blood and lymphatic flow. Cardiac biomarkers become detectable in the peripheral blood once the capacity
of the cardiac lymphatics to clear the interstitium of the infarct zone is exceeded and spillover into the venous
circulation occurs. The temporal pattern of protein release is of diagnostic importance, but contemporary urgent
reperfusion strategies necessitate making a decision (based largely on a combination of clinical and ECG findings)
before the results of blood tests have returned from the laboratory. Rapid whole-blood bedside assays for serum
cardiac markers are now available and may facilitate management decisions, particularly in patients with
nondiagnostic ECGs.
Cardiac-specific troponin T (cTnT) and cardiac-specific troponin I (cTnI) have amino-acid sequences different from
those of the skeletal muscle forms of these proteins. These differences permitted the development of quantitative
assays for cTnT and cTnI with highly specific monoclonal antibodies. Since cTnT and cTnI are not normally
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

4/29

2/4/2015
detectable in the blood of healthy individuals but may increase after STEMI to levels >20 times higher than the
upper reference limit (the highest value seen in 99% of a reference population not suffering from MI), the
measurement of cTnT or cTnI is of considerable diagnostic usefulness, and they are now the preferred biochemical
markers for MI (Fig. 245-2). The cardiac troponins are particularly valuable when there is clinical suspicion of either
skeletal muscle injury or a small MI that may be below the detection limit for creatine phosphokinase (CK) and its
MB isoenzyme (CKMB) measurements, and they are, therefore, of particular value in distinguishing UA from
NSTEMI. Levels of cTnI and cTnT may remain elevated for 710 days after STEMI.
FIGURE 245-2

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

5/29

2/4/2015

The zone of necrosing myocardium is shown at the top of the figure, followed in the middle portion of the figure by
a diagram of a cardiomyocyte that is in the process of releasing biomarkers. The biomarkers that are released into
the interstitium are first cleared by lymphatics followed subsequently by spillover into the venous system. After
disruption of the sarcolemmal membrane of the cardiomyocyte, the cytoplasmic pool of biomarkers is released first
(left-most arrow in bottom portion of figure). Markers such as myoglobin and CK isoforms are rapidly released, and
blood levels rise quickly above the cutoff limit; this is then followed by a more protracted release of biomarkers
from the disintegrating myofilaments that may continue for several days. Cardiac troponin levels rise to about 20 to
50 times the upper reference limit (the 99th percentile of values in a reference control group) in patients who have a
"classic" acute myocardial infarction (MI) and sustain sufficient myocardial necrosis to result in abnormally elevated
levels of the MB fraction of creatine kinase (CKMB). Clinicians can now diagnose episodes of microinfarction by
sensitive assays that detect cardiac troponin elevations above the upper reference limit, even though CKMB levels
may still be in the normal reference range (not shown). CV = coefficient of variation. (Modified from Antman EM:
Decision making with cardiac troponin tests. N Engl J Med 346:2079, 2002 and Jaffe AS, Babiun L, Apple FS:
Biomarkers in acute cardiac disease: The present and the future. J Am Coll Cardiol 48:1, 2006.)
CK rises within 48 h and generally returns to normal by 4872 h (Fig. 245-2). An important drawback of total CK
measurement is its lack of specificity for STEMI, as CK may be elevated with skeletal muscle disease or trauma,
including intramuscular injection. The MB isoenzyme of CK has the advantage over total CK that it is not present in
significant concentrations in extracardiac tissue and, therefore, is considerably more specific. However, cardiac
surgery, myocarditis, and electrical cardioversion often result in elevated serum levels of the MB isoenzyme. A ratio
(relative index) of CKMB mass: CK activity 2.5 suggests but is not diagnostic of a myocardial rather than a
skeletal muscle source for the CKMB elevation.
Many hospitals are using cTnT or cTnI rather than CKMB as the routine serum cardiac marker for diagnosis of
STEMI, although any of these analytes remain clinically acceptable. It is not cost-effective to measure both a
cardiac-specific troponin and CKMB at all time points in every patient.
While it has long been recognized that the total quantity of protein released correlates with the size of the infarct,
the peak protein concentration correlates only weakly with infarct size. Recanalization of a coronary artery
occlusion (either spontaneously or by mechanical or pharmacologic means) in the early hours of STEMI causes
earlier peaking of biomarker measurements (Fig. 245-2) because of a rapid washout from the interstitium of the
infarct zone, quickly overwhelming lymphatic clearance of the proteins.
The nonspecific reaction to myocardial injury is associated with polymorphonuclear leukocytosis, which appears
within a few hours after the onset of pain and persists for 37 days; the white blood cell count often reaches levels
of 12,00015,000/L. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate rises more slowly than the white blood cell count,
peaking during the first week and sometimes remaining elevated for one or two weeks.

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

6/29

2/4/2015
Cardiac Imaging
Abnormalities of wall motion on two-dimensional echocardiography (Chap. 229) are almost universally present.
Although acute STEMI cannot be distinguished from an old myocardial scar or from acute severe ischemia by
echocardiography, the ease and safety of the procedure make its use appealing as a screening tool in the
Emergency Department setting. When the ECG is not diagnostic of STEMI, early detection of the presence or
absence of wall motion abnormalities by echocardiography can aid in management decisions, such as whether the
patient should receive reperfusion therapy [e.g., fibrinolysis or a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)].
Echocardiographic estimation of left ventricular (LV) function is useful prognostically; detection of reduced function
serves as an indication for therapy with an inhibitor of the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system.
Echocardiography may also identify the presence of right ventricular (RV) infarction, ventricular aneurysm,
pericardial effusion, and LV thrombus. In addition, Doppler echocardiography is useful in the detection and
quantitation of a ventricular septal defect and mitral regurgitation, two serious complications of STEMI.
Several radionuclide imaging techniques (Chap. 229) are available for evaluating patients with suspected STEMI.
However, these imaging modalities are used less often than echocardiography because they are more
cumbersome and lack sensitivity and specificity in many clinical circumstances. Myocardial perfusion imaging with
[201Tl] or [99mTc]-sestamibi, which are distributed in proportion to myocardial blood flow and concentrated by
viable myocardium (Chap. 243), reveal a defect ("cold spot") in most patients during the first few hours after
development of a transmural infarct. Although perfusion scanning is extremely sensitive, it cannot distinguish acute
infarcts from chronic scars and, thus, is not specific for the diagnosis of acute MI. Radionuclide ventriculography,
carried out with [99mTc]-labeled red blood cells, frequently demonstrates wall motion disorders and reduction in
the ventricular ejection fraction in patients with STEMI. While of value in assessing the hemodynamic
consequences of infarction and in aiding in the diagnosis of RV infarction when the RV ejection fraction is
depressed, this technique is nonspecific, as many cardiac abnormalities other than MI alter the radionuclide
ventriculogram.
Myocardial infarction can be detected accurately with high-resolution cardiac MRI (Chap. 229) using a technique
referred to as late enhancement. A standard imaging agent (gadolinium) is administered and images are obtained
after a 10-min delay. Since little gadolinium enters normal myocardium, where there are tightly packed myocytes,
but does percolate into the expanded intercellular region of the infarct zone, there is a bright signal in areas of
infarction that appears in stark contrast to the dark areas of normal myocardium.
Initial Management

Prehospital Care
The prognosis in STEMI is largely related to the occurrence of two general classes of complications: (1) electrical
complications (arrhythmias) and (2) mechanical complications ("pump failure"). Most out-of-hospital deaths from
STEMI are due to the sudden development of ventricular fibrillation. The vast majority of deaths due to ventricular
fibrillation occur within the first 24 h of the onset of symptoms, and of these, over half occur in the first hour.
Therefore, the major elements of prehospital care of patients with suspected STEMI include (1) recognition of
symptoms by the patient and prompt seeking of medical attention; (2) rapid deployment of an emergency medical
team capable of performing resuscitative maneuvers, including defibrillation; (3) expeditious transportation of the
patient to a hospital facility that is continuously staffed by physicians and nurses skilled in managing arrhythmias
and providing advanced cardiac life support; and (4) expeditious implementation of reperfusion therapy (Fig. 245-
3). The greatest delay usually occurs not during transportation to the hospital but, rather, between the onset of
pain and the patient's decision to call for help. This delay can best be reduced by health care professionals
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

7/29

2/4/2015
educating the public concerning the significance of chest discomfort and the importance of seeking early medical
attention. Regular office visits with patients having a history of or who are at risk for ischemic heart disease are
important "teachable moments" for clinicians to review the symptoms of STEMI and the appropriate action plan.
FIGURE 245-3

Major components of time delay between onset of symptoms from STEMI and restoration of flow in the
infarct-related artery. Plotted sequentially from left to right are the times for patients to recognize symptoms and
seek medical attention, transportation to the hospital, in-hospital decision making, implementation of reperfusion
strategy, and restoration of flow once the reperfusion strategy has been initiated. The time to initiate fibrinolytic
therapy is the "door-to-needle" (D-N) time; this is followed by the period of time required for pharmacologic
restoration of flow. More time is required to move the patient to the catheterization laboratory for a percutaneous
coronary interventional (PCI) procedure, referred to as the "door-to-balloon" (D-B) time, but restoration of flow in
the epicardial infarctrelated artery occurs promptly after PCI. At the bottom is a variety of methods for speeding
the time to reperfusion along with the goals for the time intervals for the various components of the time delay.
(Adapted from CP Cannon et al: J Thromb Thrombol 1:27, 1994.)
Increasingly, monitoring and treatment are carried out by trained personnel in the ambulance, further shortening
the time between the onset of the infarction and appropriate treatment. General guidelines for initiation of
fibrinolysis in the prehospital setting include the ability to transmit 12-lead ECGs to confirm the diagnosis, the
presence of paramedics in the ambulance, training of paramedics in the interpretation of ECGs and management
of STEMI, and online medical command and control that can authorize the initiation of treatment in the field.
Management in the Emergency Department
In the Emergency Department, the goals for the management of patients with suspected STEMI include control of

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

8/29

2/4/2015
cardiac discomfort, rapid identification of patients who are candidates for urgent reperfusion therapy, triage of
lower-risk patients to the appropriate location in the hospital, and avoidance of inappropriate discharge of patients
with STEMI. Many aspects of the treatment of STEMI are initiated in the Emergency Department and then
continued during the in-hospital phase of management.
Aspirin is essential in the management of patients with suspected STEMI and is effective across the entire
spectrum of acute coronary syndromes (Fig. 245-1). Rapid inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1 in platelets followed by a
reduction of thromboxane A2 levels is achieved by buccal absorption of a chewed 160325-mg tablet in the
Emergency Department. This measure should be followed by daily oral administration of aspirin in a dose of 75
162 mg.
In patients whose arterial O2 saturation is normal, supplemental O2 is of limited if any clinical benefit and therefore
is not cost-effective. However, when hypoxemia is present, O2 should be administered by nasal prongs or face
mask (24 L/min) for the first 612 h after infarction; the patient should then be reassessed to determine if there is a
continued need for such treatment.
Control of Discomfort
Sublingual nitroglycerin can be given safely to most patients with STEMI. Up to three doses of 0.4 mg should be
administered at about 5-min intervals. In addition to diminishing or abolishing chest discomfort, nitroglycerin may
be capable of both decreasing myocardial oxygen demand (by lowering preload) and increasing myocardial
oxygen supply (by dilating infarct-related coronary vessels or collateral vessels). In patients whose initially
favorable response to sublingual nitroglycerin is followed by the return of chest discomfort, particularly if
accompanied by other evidence of ongoing ischemia such as further ST-segment or T-wave shifts, the use of
intravenous nitroglycerin should be considered. Therapy with nitrates should be avoided in patients who present
with low systolic arterial pressure (<90 mmHg) or in whom there is clinical suspicion of right ventricular infarction
(inferior infarction on ECG, elevated jugular venous pressure, clear lungs, and hypotension). Nitrates should not be
administered to patients who have taken the phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor sildenafil for erectile dysfunction within
the preceding 24 h, because it may potentiate the hypotensive effects of nitrates. An idiosyncratic reaction to
nitrates, consisting of sudden marked hypotension, sometimes occurs but can usually be reversed promptly by the
rapid administration of intravenous atropine.
Morphine is a very effective analgesic for the pain associated with STEMI. However, it may reduce sympathetically
mediated arteriolar and venous constriction, and the resulting venous pooling may reduce cardiac output and
arterial pressure. These hemodynamic disturbances usually respond promptly to elevation of the legs, but in some
patients volume expansion with intravenous saline is required. The patient may experience diaphoresis and
nausea, but these events usually pass and are replaced by a feeling of well-being associated with the relief of pain.
Morphine also has a vagotonic effect and may cause bradycardia or advanced degrees of heart block, particularly
in patients with inferior infarction. These side effects usually respond to atropine (0.5 mg intravenously). Morphine
is routinely administered by repetitive (every 5 min) intravenous injection of small doses (24 mg), rather than by the
subcutaneous administration of a larger quantity, because absorption may be unpredictable by the latter route.
Intravenous beta blockers are also useful in the control of the pain of STEMI. These drugs control pain effectively in
some patients, presumably by diminishing myocardial O2 demand and hence ischemia. More important, there is
evidence that intravenous beta blockers reduce the risks of reinfarction and ventricular fibrillation (see "Beta-
Adrenoceptor Blockers" below). However, patient selection is important when considering beta blockers for
STEMI. Oral beta-blocker therapy should be initiated in the first 24 h for patients who do not have any of the
following: 1) signs of heart failure, 2) evidence of a low-output state, 3) increased risk for cardiogenic shock, or 4)
other relative contraindications to beta blockade (PR interval greater than 0.24 seconds, second- or third-degree

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

9/29

2/4/2015
heart block, active asthma, or reactive airway disease). A commonly employed regimen is metoprolol, 5 mg every
25 min for a total of 3 doses, provided the patient has a heart rate >60 beats per minute (bpm), systolic pressure
>100 mmHg, a PR interval <0.24 s, and rales that are no higher than 10 cm up from the diaphragm. Fifteen minutes
after the last intravenous dose, an oral regimen is initiated of 50 mg every 6 h for 48 h, followed by 100 mg every
12 h.
Unlike beta blockers, calcium antagonists are of little value in the acute setting, and there is evidence that short-
acting dihydropyridines may be associated with an increased mortality risk.
Management Strategies
The primary tool for screening patients and making triage decisions is the initial 12-lead ECG. When ST-segment
elevation of at least 2 mm in 2 contiguous precordial leads and 1 mm in 2 adjacent limb leads is present, a patient
should be considered a candidate for reperfusion therapy(Fig. 245-4). The process of selecting patients for
fibrinolysis versus primary PCI (angioplasty, or stenting; Chap. 246) is discussed below. In the absence of ST-
segment elevation, fibrinolysis is not helpful, and evidence exists suggesting that it may be harmful.
FIGURE 245-4

Options for transportation of patients with STEMI and initial reperfusion treatment. Patient transported by EMS
after calling 911: Reperfusion in patients with STEMI can be accomplished by the pharmacologic (fibrinolysis) or
catheter-based (primary PCI) approaches. Implementation of these strategies varies based on the mode of
transportation of the patient and capabilities at the receiving hospital. Transport time to the hospital is variable
from case to case, but the goal is to keep total ischemic time within 120 min. There are three possible scenarios:
(1) If EMS has fibrinolytic capability and the patient qualifies for therapy, prehospital fibrinolysis should be started
within 30 min of EMS arrival on scene. (2) If EMS is not capable of administering prehospital fibrinolysis and the
patient is transported to a non-PCI-capable hospital, the hospital door-to-needle time should be within 30 min for
patients in whom fibrinolysis is indicated. (3) If EMS is not capable of administering prehospital fibrinolysis and the
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023
10/29

2/4/2015
patient is transported to a PCI-capable hospital, the hospital door-to-balloon time should be within 90 min.
Interhospital transfer: It is also appropriate to consider emergency interhospital transfer of the patient to a PCI-
capable hospital for mechanical revascularization if: (1) there is a contraindication to fibrinolysis, (2) PCI can be
initiated promptly (within 90 minutes after the patient presented to the initial receiving hospital or within 60 min
compared to when fibrinolysis with a fibrin-specific agent could be initiated at the initial receiving hospital), (3)
fibrinolysis is administered and is unsuccessful (i.e., "rescue PCI"). Secondary nonemergency interhospital transfer
can be considered for recurrent ischemia. Patient self-transport: Patient self-transportation is discouraged. If the
patient arrives at a non-PCI-capable hospital, the door-to-needle time should be within 30 min. If the patient
arrives at a PCI-capable hospital, the door-to-balloon time should be within 90 min. The treatment options and
time recommended after first hospital arrival are the same. [Adapted with permission from Antman et al: ACC/AHA
guidelines for the management of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: A report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Revise the
1999 Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction). Circulation 110:e82, 2004.]
Limitation of Infarct Size
The quantity of myocardium that becomes necrotic as a consequence of a coronary artery occlusion is determined
by factors other than just the site of occlusion. While the central zone of the infarct contains necrotic tissue that is
irretrievably lost, the fate of the surrounding ischemic myocardium (ischemic penumbra) may be improved by
timely restoration of coronary perfusion, reduction of myocardial O2 demands, prevention of the accumulation of
noxious metabolites, and blunting of the impact of mediators of reperfusion injury (e.g., calcium overload and
oxygen-derived free radicals). Up to one-third of patients with STEMI may achieve spontaneous reperfusion of the
infarct-related coronary artery within 24 h and experience improved healing of infarcted tissue. Reperfusion, either
pharmacologically (by fibrinolysis) or by PCI, accelerates the opening of infarct-related arteries in those patients in
whom spontaneous fibrinolysis ultimately would have occurred and also greatly increases the number of patients in
whom restoration of flow in the infarct-related artery is accomplished. Timely restoration of flow in the epicardial
infarctrelated artery combined with improved perfusion of the downstream zone of infarcted myocardium results
in a limitation of infarct size. Protection of the ischemic myocardium by the maintenance of an optimal balance
between myocardial O2 supply and demand through pain control, treatment of congestive heart failure (CHF), and
minimization of tachycardia and hypertension extends the "window" of time for the salvage of myocardium by
reperfusion strategies.
Glucocorticoids and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, with the exception of aspirin, should be avoided in
patients with STEMI. They can impair infarct healing and increase the risk of myocardial rupture, and their use may
result in a larger infarct scar. In addition, they can increase coronary vascular resistance, thereby potentially
reducing flow to ischemic myocardium.
Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
(See also Chap. 246) PCI, usually angioplasty and/or stenting without preceding fibrinolysis, referred to as primary
PCI, is effective in restoring perfusion in STEMI when carried out on an emergency basis in the first few hours of
MI. It has the advantage of being applicable to patients who have contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy (see
below) but otherwise are considered appropriate candidates for reperfusion. It appears to be more effective than
fibrinolysis in opening occluded coronary arteries and, when performed by experienced operators [75 PCI cases
(not necessarily primary) per year] in dedicated medical centers (36 primary PCI cases per year), is associated with
better short-term and long-term clinical outcomes. Compared with fibrinolysis, primary PCI is generally preferred
when the diagnosis is in doubt, cardiogenic shock is present, bleeding risk is increased, or symptoms have been
present for at least 23 h when the clot is more mature and less easily lysed by fibrinolytic drugs. However, PCI is
expensive in terms of personnel and facilities, and its applicability is limited by its availability, around the clock, in
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

11/29

2/4/2015
only a minority of hospitals.
Fibrinolysis
If no contraindications are present (see below), fibrinolytic therapy should ideally be initiated within 30 min of
presentation (i.e., door-to-needle time 30 min). The principal goal of fibrinolysis is prompt restoration of full
coronary arterial patency. The fibrinolytic agents tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), streptokinase, tenecteplase
(TNK), and reteplase (rPA) have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for intravenous use in
patients with STEMI. These drugs all act by promoting the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin, which
subsequently lyses fibrinthrombi. Although considerable emphasis was first placed on a distinction between more
fibrin-specific agents, such as tPA, and non-fibrin-specific agents, such as streptokinase, it is now recognized that
these differences are only relative, as some degree of systemic fibrinolysis occurs with the former agents. TNK and
rPA are referred to as bolus fibrinolytics since their administration does not require a prolonged intravenous
infusion.
When assessed angiographically, flow in the culprit coronary artery is described by a simple qualitative scale called
the thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI)grading system: grade 0 indicates complete occlusion of the infarct-
related artery; grade 1 indicates some penetration of the contrast material beyond the point of obstruction but
without perfusion of the distal coronary bed; grade 2 indicates perfusion of the entire infarct vessel into the distal
bed, but with flow that is delayed compared with that of a normal artery; and grade 3 indicates full perfusion of the
infarct vessel with normal flow. The latter is the goal of reperfusion therapy, because full perfusion of the infarct-
related coronary artery yields far better results in terms of limiting infarct size, maintenance of LV function, and
reduction of both short- and long-term mortality rates. Additional methods of angiographic assessment of the
efficacy of fibrinolysis include counting the number of frames on the cine film required for dye to flow from the
origin of the infarct-related artery to a landmark in the distal vascular bed (TIMI frame count) and determining the
rate of entry and exit of contrast dye from the microvasculature in the myocardial infarct zone (TIMI myocardial
perfusion grade). These methods have an even tighter correlation with outcomes after STEMI than the more
commonly employed TIMI flow grade.
Fibrinolytic therapy can reduce the relative risk of in-hospital death by up to 50% when administered within the first
hour of the onset of symptoms of STEMI, and much of this benefit is maintained for at least 10 years. When
appropriately used, fibrinolytic therapy appears to reduce infarct size, limit LV dysfunction, and reduce the
incidence of serious complications such as septal rupture, cardiogenic shock, and malignant ventricular
arrhythmias. Since myocardium can be salvaged only before it has been irreversibly injured, the timing of
reperfusion therapy, by fibrinolysis or a catheter-based approach, is of extreme importance in achieving maximum
benefit. While the upper time limit depends on specific factors in individual patients, it is clear that every minute
counts and that patients treated within 13 h of the onset of symptoms generally benefit most. Although reduction
of the mortality rate is more modest, the therapy remains of benefit for many patients seen 36 h after the onset of
infarction, and some benefit appears to be possible up to 12 h, especially if chest discomfort is still present and ST
segments remain elevated. Compared with PCI for STEMI (primary PCI), fibrinolysis is generally the preferred
reperfusion strategy for patients presenting in the first hour of symptoms, if there are logistical concerns about
transportation of the patient to a suitable PCI center (experienced operator and team with a track record for a
"door-to-balloon" time of <2 h), or there is an anticipated delay of at least 1 h between the time that fibrinolysis
could be started versus implementation of PCI. Although patients <75 years achieve a greater relative reduction in
the mortality rate with fibrinolytic therapy than do older patients, the higher absolute mortality rate (1525%) in the
latter results in similar absolute reductions in the mortality rates for both age groups.
tPA and the other relatively fibrin-specific plasminogen activators, rPA and TNK, are more effective than
streptokinase at restoring full perfusioni.e., TIMI grade 3 coronary flowand have a small edge in improving
survival as well. The current recommended regimen of tPA consists of a 15-mg bolus followed by 50 mg
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

12/29

2/4/2015
intravenously over the first 30 min, followed by 35 mg over the next 60 min. Streptokinase is administered as 1.5
million units (MU) intravenously over 1 h. rPA is administered in a double-bolus regimen consisting of a 10-MU
bolus given over 23 min, followed by a second 10-MU bolus 30 min later. TNK is given as a single weight-based
intravenous bolus of 0.53 mg/kg over 10 s. In addition to the fibrinolytic agents discussed above, pharmacologic
reperfusion typically involves adjunctive antiplatelet and antithrombotic drugs, as discussed subsequently.
Alternative pharmacologic regimens for reperfusion combine an intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor with a
reduced dose of a fibrinolytic agent. Compared with fibrinolytic agents that involve a prolonged infusion (e.g., tPA),
such combination reperfusion regimens facilitate the rate and extent of fibrinolysis by inhibiting platelet
aggregation, weakening the clot structure, and allowing penetration of the fibrinolytic agent deeper into the clot.
However, combination reperfusion regimens have similar efficacy as compared with bolus fibrinolytics and are
associated with an increased risk of bleeding, especially in patients >75 years. Therefore, combination reperfusion
regimens are not recommended for routine use. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, given alone or in combination with a
reduced dose of a fibrinolytic agent as part of a preparatory regimen before planned immediate PCI (facilitated
PCI), have not been shown to reduce infarct size or improve outcomes and, furthermore, are associated with
increased bleeding. Facilitated PCI is, therefore, also not a strategy that is recommended for routine use.
Integrated Reperfusion Strategy
Evidence has emerged that suggests PCI plays an increasingly important role in the management of STEMI. Prior
approaches that segregated the pharmacologic and catheter-based approaches to reperfusion have now been
replaced with an integrated approach to triage and transfer of STEMI patients to receive PCI (Fig. 245-5).
FIGURE 245-5

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

13/29

2/4/2015

Each community and each facility in that community should have an agreed-upon plan for how STEMI patients are
to be treated that includes which hospitals should receive STEMI patients from EMS units capable of obtaining
diagnostic ECGs, management at the initial receiving hospital, and written criteria and agreements for expeditious
transfer of patients from non-PCI-capable facilities. Patients initially seen at a PCI-capable facility (left side of
diagram) should be sent promptly to the cardiac catheterization laboratory with the intent to perform primary PCI.
Patients initially seen at a non-PCI-capable facility (right side of diagram) should rapidly be assessed for the
optimum reperfusion therapy (see box in top right corner for assessment criteria). This may include transfer for
primary PCI or initial treatment with a fibrinolytic. Following administration of a fibrinolytic, management is dictated
by the patient's overall risk for death/serious complications of STEMI, and whether or not they experience
recurrent ischemic symptoms or left-ventricular failure (see the two boxes at the bottom right of diagram). [Adapted
from Kushner FG et al: 2009 focused update of the ACC/AHA Guidelines for the Management of Patients with ST-
Elevation Myocardial Infarction (updating the 2004 guideline and 2007 focused update): a report of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation
120:2271, 2009.]
Contraindications and Complications
Clear contraindications to the use of fibrinolytic agents include a history of cerebrovascular hemorrhage at any
time, a nonhemorrhagic stroke or other cerebrovascular event within the past year, marked hypertension (a reliably
determined systolic arterial pressure >180 mmHg and/or a diastolic pressure >110 mmHg) at any time during the
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

14/29

2/4/2015
acute presentation, suspicion of aortic dissection, and active internal bleeding (excluding menses). While advanced
age is associated with an increase in hemorrhagic complications, the benefit of fibrinolytic therapy in the elderly
appears to justify its use if no other contraindications are present and the amount of myocardium in jeopardy
appears to be substantial.
Relative contraindications to fibrinolytic therapy, which require assessment of the risk:benefit ratio, include current
use of anticoagulants (international normalized ratio2), a recent (<2 weeks) invasive or surgical procedure or
prolonged (>10 min) cardiopulmonary resuscitation, known bleeding diathesis, pregnancy, a hemorrhagic
ophthalmic condition (e.g., hemorrhagic diabetic retinopathy), active peptic ulcer disease, and a history of severe
hypertension that is currently adequately controlled. Because of the risk of an allergic reaction, patients should not
receive streptokinase if that agent had been received within the preceding five days to two years.
Allergic reactions to streptokinase occur in 2% of patients who receive it. While a minor degree of hypotension
occurs in 410% of patients given this agent, marked hypotension occurs, although rarely, in association with
severe allergic reactions.
Hemorrhage is the most frequent and potentially the most serious complication. Because bleeding episodes that
require transfusion are more common when patients require invasive procedures, unnecessary venous or arterial
interventions should be avoided in patients receiving fibrinolytic agents. Hemorrhagic stroke is the most serious
complication and occurs in 0.50.9% of patients being treated with these agents. This rate increases with
advancing age, with patients >70 years experiencing roughly twice the rate of intracranial hemorrhage as those
<65 years. Large-scale trials have suggested that the rate of intracranial hemorrhage with tPA or rPA is slightly
higher than with streptokinase.
Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography should be carried out after fibrinolytic therapy if there is
evidence of either (1) failure of reperfusion (persistent chest pain and ST-segment elevation >90 min), in which case
a rescue PCI should be considered; or (2) coronary artery reocclusion (re-elevation of ST segments and/or
recurrent chest pain) or the development of recurrent ischemia (such as recurrent angina in the early hospital
course or a positive exercise stress test before discharge), in which case an urgent PCI should be considered. The
potential benefits of routine angiography and elective PCI even in asymptomatic patients following administration
of fibrinolytic therapy are controversial, but such an approach may have merit given the numerous technological
advances that have occurred in the catheterization laboratory and the increasing number of skilled
interventionalists. Coronary artery bypass surgery should be reserved for patients whose coronary anatomy is
unsuited to PCI but in whom revascularization appears to be advisable because of extensive jeopardized
myocardium or recurrent ischemia.
Hospital Phase Management

Coronary Care Units
These units are routinely equipped with a system that permits continuous monitoring of the cardiac rhythm of each
patient and hemodynamic monitoring in selected patients. Defibrillators, respirators, noninvasive transthoracic
pacemakers, and facilities for introducing pacing catheters and flow-directed balloon-tipped catheters are also
usually available. Equally important is the organization of a highly trained team of nurses who can recognize
arrhythmias; adjust the dosage of antiarrhythmic, vasoactive, and anticoagulant drugs; and perform cardiac
resuscitation, including electroshock, when necessary.
Patients should be admitted to a coronary care unit early in their illness when it is expected that they will derive
benefit from the sophisticated and expensive care provided. The availability of electrocardiographic monitoring and
trained personnel outside the coronary care unit has made it possible to admit lower-risk patients (e.g., those not
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

15/29

2/4/2015
hemodynamically compromised and without active arrhythmias) to "intermediate care units."
The duration of stay in the coronary care unit is dictated by the ongoing need for intensive care. If symptoms are
controlled with oral therapy, patients may be transferred out of the coronary care unit. Also, patients who have a
confirmed STEMI but who are considered to be at low risk [no prior infarction and no persistent chest discomfort,
congestive heart failure (CHF), hypotension, or cardiac arrhythmias] may be safely transferred out of the coronary
care unit within 24 h.
Activity
Factors that increase the work of the heart during the initial hours of infarction may increase the size of the infarct.
Therefore, patients with STEMI should be kept at bed rest for the first 12 h. However, in the absence of
complications, patients should be encouraged, under supervision, to resume an upright posture by dangling their
feet over the side of the bed and sitting in a chair within the first 24 h. This practice is psychologically beneficial
and usually results in a reduction in the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. In the absence of hypotension and
other complications, by the second or third day, patients typically are ambulating in their room with increasing
duration and frequency, and they may shower or stand at the sink to bathe. By day 3 after infarction, patients
should be increasing their ambulation progressively to a goal of 185 m (600 ft) at least 3 times a day.
Diet
Because of the risk of emesis and aspiration soon after STEMI, patients should receive either nothing or only clear
liquids by mouth for the first 412 h. The typical coronary care unit diet should provide 30% of total calories as fat
and have a cholesterol content of 300 mg/d. Complex carbohydrates should make up 5055% of total calories.
Portions should not be unusually large, and the menu should be enriched with foods that are high in potassium,
magnesium, and fiber, but low in sodium. Diabetes mellitus and hypertriglyceridemia are managed by restriction of
concentrated sweets in the diet.
Bowel Management
Bed rest and the effect of the narcotics used for the relief of pain often lead to constipation. A bedside commode
rather than a bedpan, a diet rich in bulk, and the routine use of a stool softener such as dioctyl sodium
sulfosuccinate (200 mg/d) are recommended. If the patient remains constipated despite these measures, a laxative
can be prescribed. Contrary to prior belief, it is safe to perform a gentle rectal examination on patients with STEMI.
Sedation
Many patients require sedation during hospitalization to withstand the period of enforced inactivity with tranquillity.
Diazepam (5 mg), oxazepam (1530 mg), or lorazepam (0.52 mg), given 34 times daily, is usually effective. An
additional dose of any of the above medications may be given at night to ensure adequate sleep. Attention to this
problem is especially important during the first few days in the coronary care unit, where the atmosphere of 24-h
vigilance may interfere with the patient's sleep. However, sedation is no substitute for reassuring, quiet
surroundings. Many drugs used in the coronary care unit, such as atropine, H2 blockers, and narcotics, can
produce delirium, particularly in the elderly. This effect should not be confused with agitation, and it is wise to
conduct a thorough review of the patient's medications before arbitrarily prescribing additional doses of
anxiolytics.
Pharmacotherapy

Antithrombotic Agents

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

16/29

2/4/2015
The use of antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy during the initial phase of STEMI is based on extensive laboratory
and clinical evidence that thrombosis plays an important role in the pathogenesis of this condition. The primary
goal of treatment with antiplatelet and anticoagulant agents is to maintain patency of the infarct-related artery, in
conjunction with reperfusion strategies. A secondary goal is to reduce the patient's tendency to thrombosis and,
thus, the likelihood of mural thrombus formation or deep venous thrombosis, either of which could result in
pulmonary embolization. The degree to which antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy achieves these goals partly
determines how effectively it reduces the risk of mortality from STEMI.
As noted previously (see "Management in the Emergency Department" above), aspirin is the standard antiplatelet
agent for patients with STEMI. The most compelling evidence for the benefits of antiplatelet therapy (mainly with
aspirin) in STEMI is found in the comprehensive overview by the Antiplatelet Trialists' Collaboration. Data from
nearly 20,000 patients with MI enrolled in 15 randomized trials were pooled and revealed a relative reduction of
27% in the mortality rate, from 14.2% in control patients to 10.4% in patients receiving antiplatelet agents.
Inhibitors of the P2Y12 ADP receptor prevent activation and aggregation of platelets. The addition of the P2Y12
inhibitor clopidogrel to background treatment with aspirin to STEMI patients reduces the risk of clinical events
(death, reinfarction, stroke) and, in patients receiving fibrinolytic therapy, has been shown to prevent reocclusion of
a successfully reperfused infarct artery. New P2Y12 ADP receptor antagonists, such as prasugrel and ticagrelor,
are more effective than clopidogrel in preventing ischemic complications in STEMI patients undergoing PCI, but
are associated with an increased risk of bleeding. Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors appear useful for
preventing thrombotic complications in patients with STEMI undergoing PCI.
The standard anticoagulant agent used in clinical practice is unfractionated heparin (UFH). The available data
suggest that when UFH is added to a regimen of aspirin and a non-fibrin-specific thrombolytic agent such as
streptokinase, additional mortality benefit occurs (about 5 lives saved per 1000 patients treated). It appears that
the immediate administration of intravenous UFH, in addition to a regimen of aspirin and relatively fibrin-specific
fibrinolytic agents (tPA, rPA, or TNK), helps to maintain patency of the infarct-related artery. This effect is achieved
at the cost of a small increased risk of bleeding. The recommended dose of UFH is an initial bolus of 60 U/kg
(maximum 4000 U) followed by an initial infusion of 12 U/kg per hour (maximum 1000 U/h). The activated partial
thromboplastin time during maintenance therapy should be 1.52 times the control value.
Alternatives to UFH for anticoagulation of patients with STEMI are the low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH)
preparations, a synthetic version of the critical pentasaccharide sequence (fondaparinux), and the direct
antithrombin bivalirudin. Advantages of LMWHs include high bioavailability permitting administration
subcutaneously, reliable anticoagulation without monitoring, and greater antiXa:IIa activity. Enoxaparin has been
shown to reduce significantly the composite endpoints of death/nonfatal reinfarction and death/nonfatal
reinfarction/urgent revascularization compared with UFH in STEMI patients who receive fibrinolysis. Treatment with
enoxaparin is associated with higher rates of serious bleeding, but net clinical benefita composite endpoint that
combines efficacy and safetystill favors enoxaparin over UFH. Interpretation of the data on fondaparinux is
difficult because of the complex nature of the pivotal clinical trial evaluating it in STEMI (OASIS-6). Fondaparinux
appears superior to placebo in STEMI patients not receiving reperfusion therapy, but its relative efficacy and safety
compared with UFH is less certain. Owing to the risk of catheter thrombosis, fondaparinux should not be used
alone at the time of coronary angiography and PCI but should be combined with another anticoagulant with
antithrombin activity such as UFH or bivalirudin. Contemporary trials of bivalirudin used an open-label design to
evaluate its efficacy and safety compared with UFH plus a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor. Bivalirudin was associated
with a lower rate of bleeding, largely driven by reductions in vascular access site hematomas 5 cm or the
administration of blood transfusions.
Patients with an anterior location of the infarction, severe LV dysfunction, heart failure, a history of embolism, two-
dimensional echocardiographic evidence of mural thrombus, or atrial fibrillation are at increased risk of systemic or
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023
17/29

2/4/2015
pulmonary thromboembolism. Such individuals should receive full therapeutic levels of anticoagulant therapy
(LMWH or UFH) while hospitalized, followed by at least three months of warfarin therapy.
Beta-Adrenoceptor Blockers
The benefits of beta blockers in patients with STEMI can be divided into those that occur immediately when the
drug is given acutely and those that accrue over the long term when the drug is given for secondary prevention
after an infarction. Acute intravenous beta blockade improves the myocardial O2 supply-demand relationship,
decreases pain, reduces infarct size, and decreases the incidence of serious ventricular arrhythmias. In patients
who undergo fibrinolysis soon after the onset of chest pain, no incremental reduction in mortality rate is seen with
beta blockers, but recurrent ischemia and reinfarction are reduced.
Thus, beta-blocker therapy after STEMI is useful for most patients [including those treated with an angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor] except those in whom it is specifically contraindicated (patients with heart
failure or severely compromised LV function, heart block, orthostatic hypotension, or a history of asthma) and
perhaps those whose excellent long-term prognosis (defined as an expected mortality rate of <1% per year,
patients <55 years, no previous MI, with normal ventricular function, no complex ventricular ectopy, and no angina)
markedly diminishes any potential benefit.
Inhibition of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System
ACE inhibitors reduce the mortality rate after STEMI, and the mortality benefits are additive to those achieved with
aspirin and beta blockers. The maximum benefit is seen in high-risk patients (those who are elderly or who have an
anterior infarction, a prior infarction, and/or globally depressed LV function), but evidence suggests that a short-
term benefit occurs when ACE inhibitors are prescribed unselectively to all hemodynamically stable patients with
STEMI (i.e., those with a systolic pressure >100 mmHg). The mechanism involves a reduction in ventricular
remodeling after infarction (see "Ventricular Dysfunction" below) with a subsequent reduction in the risk of CHF.
The rate of recurrent infarction may also be lower in patients treated chronically with ACE inhibitors after infarction.
Before hospital discharge, LV function should be assessed with an imaging study. ACE inhibitors should be
continued indefinitely in patients who have clinically evident CHF, in patients in whom an imaging study shows a
reduction in global LV function or a large regional wall motion abnormality, or in those who are hypertensive.
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be administered to STEMI patients who are intolerant of ACE
inhibitors and who have either clinical or radiological signs of heart failure. Long-term aldosterone blockade should
be prescribed for STEMI patients without significant renal dysfunction (creatinine 2.5 mg/dL in men and 2.0
mg/dL in women) or hyperkalemia (potassium 5.0 mEq/L) who are already receiving therapeutic doses of an ACE
inhibitor, an LV ejection fraction40 percent, and either symptomatic heart failure or diabetes mellitus. A multidrug
regimen for inhibiting the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system has been shown to reduce both heart failure
related and sudden cardiac deathrelated cardiovascular mortality after STEMI, but has not been as thoroughly
explored as ACE inhibitors in STEMI patients.
Other Agents
Favorable effects on the ischemic process and ventricular remodeling (see below) previously led many physicians
to routinely use intravenous nitroglycerin (510 g/min initial dose and up to 200 g/min as long as hemodynamic
stability is maintained) for the first 2448 h after the onset of infarction. However, the benefits of routine use of
intravenous nitroglycerin are less in the contemporary era where beta-adrenoceptor blockers and ACE inhibitors
are routinely prescribed for patients with STEMI.

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

18/29

2/4/2015
Results of multiple trials of different calcium antagonists have failed to establish a role for these agents in the
treatment of most patients with STEMI. Therefore, the routine use of calcium antagonists cannot be recommended.
Strict control of blood glucose in diabetic patients with STEMI has been shown to reduce the mortality rate. Serum
magnesium should be measured in all patients on admission, and any demonstrated deficits should be corrected
to minimize the risk of arrhythmias.
Complications and Their Management

Ventricular Dysfunction
After STEMI, the left ventricle undergoes a series of changes in shape, size, and thickness in both the infarcted and
noninfarcted segments. This process is referred to as ventricular remodeling and generally precedes the
development of clinically evident CHF in the months to years after infarction. Soon after STEMI, the left ventricle
begins to dilate. Acutely, this results from expansion of the infarct, i.e., slippage of muscle bundles, disruption of
normal myocardial cells, and tissue loss within the necrotic zone, resulting in disproportionate thinning and
elongation of the infarct zone. Later, lengthening of the noninfarcted segments occurs as well. The overall chamber
enlargement that occurs is related to the size and location of the infarct, with greater dilation following infarction of
the anterior wall and apex of the left ventricle and causing more marked hemodynamic impairment, more frequent
heart failure, and a poorer prognosis. Progressive dilation and its clinical consequences may be ameliorated by
therapy with ACE inhibitors and other vasodilators (e.g., nitrates). In patients with an ejection fraction<40%,
regardless of whether or not heart failure is present, ACE inhibitors or ARBs should be prescribed (see "Inhibition
of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System" above).
Hemodynamic Assessment
Pump failure is now the primary cause of in-hospital death from STEMI. The extent of infarction correlates well with
the degree of pump failure and with mortality, both early (within 10 days of infarction) and later. The most common
clinical signs are pulmonary rales and S3 and S4 gallop sounds. Pulmonary congestion is also frequently seen on
the chest roentgenogram. Elevated LV filling pressure and elevated pulmonary artery pressure are the
characteristic hemodynamic findings, but these findings may result from a reduction of ventricular compliance
(diastolic failure) and/or a reduction of stroke volume with secondary cardiac dilation (systolic failure) (Chap. 234).
A classification originally proposed by Killip divides patients into four groups: class I, no signs of pulmonary or
venous congestion; class II, moderate heart failure as evidenced by rales at the lung bases, S3 gallop, tachypnea,
or signs of failure of the right side of the heart, including venous and hepatic congestion; class III, severe heart
failure, pulmonary edema; and class IV, shock with systolic pressure <90 mmHg and evidence of peripheral
vasoconstriction, peripheral cyanosis, mental confusion, and oliguria. When this classification was established in
1967, the expected hospital mortality rate of patients in these classes was as follows: class I, 05%; class II, 10
20%; class III, 3545%; and class IV, 8595%. With advances in management, the mortality rate in each class has
fallen, perhaps by as much as one-third to one-half.
Hemodynamic evidence of abnormal global LV function appears when contraction is seriously impaired in 2025%
of the left ventricle. Infarction of 40% of the left ventricle usually results in cardiogenic shock (Chap. 272).
Positioning of a balloon flotation (Swan-Ganz) catheter in the pulmonary artery permits monitoring of LV filling
pressure; this technique is useful in patients who exhibit hypotension and/or clinical evidence of CHF. Cardiac
output can also be determined with a pulmonary artery catheter. With the addition of intra-arterial pressure
monitoring, systemic vascular resistance can be calculated as a guide to adjusting vasopressor and vasodilator
therapy. Some patients with STEMI have markedly elevated LV filling pressures (>22 mmHg) and normal cardiac

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

19/29

2/4/2015
indices [2.63.6 L/(min/m2)], while others have relatively low LV filling pressures (<15 mmHg) and reduced cardiac
indices. The former patients usually benefit from diuresis, while the latter may respond to volume expansion.
Hypovolemia
This is an easily corrected condition that may contribute to the hypotension and vascular collapse associated with
STEMI in some patients. It may be secondary to previous diuretic use, to reduced fluid intake during the early
stages of the illness, and/or to vomiting associated with pain or medications. Consequently, hypovolemia should
be identified and corrected in patients with STEMI and hypotension before more vigorous forms of therapy are
begun. Central venous pressure reflects RV rather than LV filling pressure and is an inadequate guide for
adjustment of blood volume, because LV function is almost always affected much more adversely than RV function
in patients with STEMI. The optimal LV filling or pulmonary artery wedge pressure may vary considerably among
patients. Each patient's ideal level (generally 20 mmHg) is reached by cautious fluid administration during careful
monitoring of oxygenation and cardiac output. Eventually, the cardiac output level plateaus, and further increases
in LV filling pressure only increase congestive symptoms and decrease systemic oxygenation without raising
arterial pressure.
Treatment: Congestive Heart Failure
The management of CHF in association with STEMI is similar to that of acute heart failure secondary to other forms
of heart disease (avoidance of hypoxemia, diuresis, afterload reduction, inotropic support) (Chap. 234), except that
the benefits of digitalis administration to patients with STEMI are unimpressive. By contrast, diuretic agents are
extremely effective, as they diminish pulmonary congestion in the presence of systolic and/or diastolic heart failure.
LV filling pressure falls and orthopnea and dyspnea improve after the intravenous administration of furosemide or
other loop diuretics. These drugs should be used with caution, however, as they can result in a massive diuresis
with associated decreases in plasma volume, cardiac output, systemic blood pressure, and, hence, coronary
perfusion. Nitrates in various forms may be used to decrease preload and congestive symptoms. Oral isosorbide
dinitrate, topical nitroglycerin ointment, or intravenous nitroglycerin all have the advantage over a diuretic of
lowering preload through venodilation without decreasing the total plasma volume. In addition, nitrates may
improve ventricular compliance if ischemia is present, as ischemia causes an elevation of LV filling pressure.
Vasodilators must be used with caution to prevent serious hypotension. As noted earlier, ACE inhibitors are an
ideal class of drugs for management of ventricular dysfunction after STEMI, especially for the long term. (See
"Inhibition of the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System" above.)
Cardiogenic Shock
Prompt reperfusion, efforts to reduce infarct size and treatment of ongoing ischemia and other complications of MI
appear to have reduced the incidence of cardiogenic shock from 20% to about 7%. Only 10% of patients with this
condition present with it on admission, while 90% develop it during hospitalization. Typically, patients who develop
cardiogenic shock have severe multivessel coronary artery disease with evidence of "piecemeal" necrosis
extending outward from the original infarct zone. The evaluation and management of cardiogenic shock and
severe power failure after STEMI are discussed in detail in Chap. 272.
Right Ventricular Infarction
Approximately one-third of patients with inferior infarction demonstrate at least a minor degree of RV necrosis. An
occasional patient with inferoposterior LV infarction also has extensive RV infarction, and rare patients present with
infarction limited primarily to the RV. Clinically significant RV infarction causes signs of severe RV failure [jugular
venous distention, Kussmaul's sign, hepatomegaly (Chap. 227)] with or without hypotension. ST-segment
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

20/29

2/4/2015
elevations of right-sided precordial ECG leads, particularly lead V4R, are frequently present in the first 24 h in
patients with RV infarction. Two-dimensional echocardiography is helpful in determining the degree of RV
dysfunction. Catheterization of the right side of the heart often reveals a distinctive hemodynamic pattern
resembling constrictive pericarditis (steep right atrial "y" descent and an early diastolic dip and plateau in RV
waveforms) (Chap. 239). Therapy consists of volume expansion to maintain adequate RV preload and efforts to
improve LV performance with attendant reduction in pulmonary capillary wedge and pulmonary arterial pressures.
Arrhythmias
(See also Chaps. 232 and 233) The incidence of arrhythmias after STEMI is higher in patients seen early after the
onset of symptoms. The mechanisms responsible for infarction-related arrhythmias include autonomic nervous
system imbalance, electrolyte disturbances, ischemia, and slowed conduction in zones of ischemic myocardium.
An arrhythmia can usually be managed successfully if trained personnel and appropriate equipment are available
when it develops. Since most deaths from arrhythmia occur during the first few hours after infarction, the
effectiveness of treatment relates directly to the speed with which patients come under medical observation. The
prompt management of arrhythmias constitutes a significant advance in the treatment of STEMI.
Ventricular Premature Beats
Infrequent, sporadic ventricular premature depolarizations occur in almost all patients with STEMI and do not
require therapy. Whereas in the past, frequent, multifocal, or early diastolic ventricular extrasystoles (so-called
warning arrhythmias) were routinely treated with antiarrhythmic drugs to reduce the risk of development of
ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation, pharmacologic therapy is now reserved for patients with
sustained ventricular arrhythmias. Prophylactic antiarrhythmic therapy (either intravenous lidocaine early or oral
agents later) is contraindicated for ventricular premature beats in the absence of clinically important ventricular
tachyarrhythmias, as such therapy may actually increase the mortality rate. Beta-adrenoceptor blocking agents are
effective in abolishing ventricular ectopic activity in patients with STEMI and in the prevention of ventricular
fibrillation. As described above (see "Beta-Adrenoceptor Blockers"), they should be used routinely in patients
without contraindications. In addition, hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia are risk factors for ventricular fibrillation
in patients with STEMI; to reduce the risk, the serum potassium concentration should be adjusted to approximately
4.5 mmol/L and magnesium to about 2.0 mmol/L.
Ventricular Tachycardia and Fibrillation
Within the first 24 h of STEMI, ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation can occur without prior warning arrhythmias.
The occurrence of ventricular fibrillation can be reduced by prophylactic administration of intravenous lidocaine.
However, prophylactic use of lidocaine has not been shown to reduce overall mortality from STEMI. In fact, in
addition to causing possible noncardiac complications, lidocaine may predispose to an excess risk of bradycardia
and asystole. For these reasons, and with earlier treatment of active ischemia, more frequent use of beta-blocking
agents, and the nearly universal success of electrical cardioversion or defibrillation, routine prophylactic
antiarrhythmic drug therapyis no longer recommended.
Sustained ventricular tachycardia that is well tolerated hemodynamically should be treated with an intravenous
regimen of amiodarone (bolus of 150 mg over 10 min, followed by infusion of 1.0 mg/min for 6 h and then 0.5
mg/min) or procainamide (bolus of 15 mg/kg over 2030 min; infusion of 14 mg/min); if it does not stop promptly,
electroversion should be used (Chap. 233). An unsynchronized discharge of 200300 J (monophasic wave form;
approximately 50% of these energies with biphasic wave forms) is used immediately in patients with ventricular
fibrillation or when ventricular tachycardia causes hemodynamic deterioration. Ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation
that is refractory to electroshock may be more responsive after the patient is treated with epinephrine (1 mg
intravenously or 10 mL of a 1:10,000 solution via the intracardiac route) or amiodarone (a 75150-mg bolus).
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

21/29

2/4/2015
Ventricular arrhythmias, including the unusual form of ventricular tachycardia known as torsades des pointes
(Chap. 233), may occur in patients with STEMI as a consequence of other concurrent problems (such as hypoxia,
hypokalemia, or other electrolyte disturbances) or of the toxic effects of an agent being administered to the patient
(such as digoxin or quinidine). A search for such secondary causes should always be undertaken.
Although the in-hospital mortality rate is increased, the long-term survival is excellent in patients who survive to
hospital discharge after primary ventricular fibrillation; i.e., ventricular fibrillation that is a primary response to acute
ischemia that occurs during the first 48 h and is not associated with predisposing factors such as CHF, shock,
bundle branch block, or ventricular aneurysm. This result is in sharp contrast to the poor prognosis for patients
who develop ventricular fibrillation secondary to severe pump failure. For patients who develop ventricular
tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation late in their hospital course (i.e., after the first 48 h), the mortality rate is
increased both in-hospital and during long-term follow-up. Such patients should be considered for
electrophysiologic study and implantation of a cardioverter/defibrillator (ICD) (Chap. 233). A more challenging issue
is the prevention of sudden cardiac death from ventricular fibrillation late after STEMI in patients who have not
exhibited sustained ventricular tachyarrhythmias during their index hospitalization. An algorithm for selection of
patients who warrant prophylactic implantation of an ICD is shown in Fig. 245-6.
FIGURE 245-6

Algorithm for assessment of need for implantation of a cardioverter/defibrillator. The appropriate
management is selected based upon measurement of left ventricular ejection fraction and assessment of the
NYHA functional class. Patients with depressed left ventricular function at least 40 days post-STEMI are referred
for insertion of an implantable cardioverter/defibrillator (ICD) if the LVEF is <3040% and they are in NYHA class II
III or if the LVEF is <3035% and they are in NYHA class I functional status. Patients with preserved left ventricular
function (LVEF >40%) do not receive an ICD regardless of NYHA functional class. All patients are treated with
medical therapy post-STEMI. [Adapted from data contained in Zipes DP, et al: ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for
management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death; a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force and the European Society of Cardiology
Committee for Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for Management of Patients with
Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death). J Am Coll Cardiol 48:1064, 2006.]
Accelerated Idioventricular Rhythm

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

22/29

2/4/2015
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm (AIVR, "slow ventricular tachycardia"), a ventricular rhythm with a rate of 60100
bpm, often occurs transiently during fibrinolytic therapy at the time of reperfusion. For the most part, AIVR, whether
it occurs in association with fibrinolytic therapy or spontaneously, is benign and does not presage the development
of classic ventricular tachycardia. Most episodes of AIVR do not require treatment if the patient is monitored
carefully, as degeneration into a more serious arrhythmia is rare.
Supraventricular Arrhythmias
Sinus tachycardia is the most common supraventricular arrhythmia. If it occurs secondary to another cause (such
as anemia, fever, heart failure, or a metabolic derangement), the primary problem should be treated first. However,
if it appears to be due to sympathetic overstimulation (e.g., as part of a hyperdynamic state), then treatment with a
beta blocker is indicated. Other common arrhythmias in this group are atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation, which are
often secondary to LV failure. Digoxin is usually the treatment of choice for supraventricular arrhythmias if heart
failure is present. If heart failure is absent, beta blockers, verapamil, or diltiazem are suitable alternatives for
controlling the ventricular rate, as they may also help to control ischemia. If the abnormal rhythm persists for >2 h
with a ventricular rate >120 bpm, or if tachycardia induces heart failure, shock, or ischemia (as manifested by
recurrent pain or ECG changes), a synchronized electroshock (100200 J monophasic wave form) should be used.
Accelerated junctional rhythms have diverse causes but may occur in patients with inferoposterior infarction.
Digitalis excess must be ruled out. In some patients with severely compromised LV function, the loss of
appropriately timed atrial systole results in a marked reduction of cardiac output. Right atrial or coronary sinus
pacing is indicated in such instances.
Sinus Bradycardia
Treatment of sinus bradycardia is indicated if hemodynamic compromise results from the slow heart rate. Atropine
is the most useful drug for increasing heart rate and should be given intravenously in doses of 0.5 mg initially. If the
rate remains <5060 bpm, additional doses of 0.2 mg, up to a total of 2.0 mg, may be given. Persistent
bradycardia (<40 bpm) despite atropine may be treated with electrical pacing. Isoproterenol should be avoided.
Atrioventricular and Intraventricular Conduction Disturbances
(See also Chap. 232) Both the in-hospital mortality rate and the post-discharge mortality rate of patients who have
complete atrioventricular (AV) block in association with anterior infarction are markedly higher than those of
patients who develop AV block with inferior infarction. This difference is related to the fact that heart block in
inferior infarction is commonly a result of increased vagal tone and/or the release of adenosine and therefore is
transient. In anterior wall infarction, however, heart block is usually related to ischemic malfunction of the
conduction system, which is commonly associated with extensive myocardial necrosis.
Temporary electrical pacing provides an effective means of increasing the heart rate of patients with bradycardia
due to AV block. However, acceleration of the heart rate may have only a limited impact on prognosis in patients
with anterior wall infarction and complete heart block in whom the large size of the infarct is the major factor
determining outcome. It should be carried out if it improves hemodynamics. Pacing does appear to be beneficial in
patients with inferoposterior infarction who have complete heart block associated with heart failure, hypotension,
marked bradycardia, or significant ventricular ectopic activity. A subgroup of these patients, those with RV
infarction, often respond poorly to ventricular pacing because of the loss of the atrial contribution to ventricular
filling. In such patients, dual-chamber AV sequential pacing may be required.
External noninvasive pacing electrodes should be positioned in a "demand" mode for patients with sinus
bradycardia (rate <50 bpm) that is unresponsive to drug therapy, Mobitz II second-degree AV block, third-degree
heart block, or bilateral bundle branch block (e.g., right bundle branch block plus left anterior fascicular block).
Retrospective studies suggest that permanent pacing may reduce the long-term risk of sudden death due to
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

23/29

2/4/2015
bradyarrhythmias in the rare patient who develops combined persistent bifascicular and transient third-degree
heart block during the acute phase of MI.
Other Complications
Recurrent Chest Discomfort
Recurrent angina develops in 25% of patients hospitalized for STEMI. This percentage is even higher in patients
who undergo successful fibrinolysis. Because recurrent or persistent ischemia often heralds extension of the
original infarct or reinfarction in a new myocardial zone and is associated with a near tripling of mortality after
STEMI, patients with these symptoms should be referred for prompt coronary arteriography and mechanical
revascularization. Repeat administration of a fibrinolytic agent is an alternative to early mechanical
revascularization.
Pericarditis
(See also Chap. 239) Pericardial friction rubs and/or pericardial pain are frequently encountered in patients with
STEMI involving the epicardium. This complication can usually be managed with aspirin (650 mg 4 times daily). It is
important to diagnose the chest pain of pericarditis accurately, because failure to recognize it may lead to the
erroneous diagnosis of recurrent ischemic pain and/or infarct extension, with resulting inappropriate use of
anticoagulants, nitrates, beta blockers, or coronary arteriography. When it occurs, complaints of pain radiating to
either trapezius muscle is helpful, because such a pattern of discomfort is typical of pericarditis but rarely occurs
with ischemic discomfort. Anticoagulants potentially could cause tamponade in the presence of acute pericarditis
(as manifested by either pain or persistent rub) and therefore should not be used unless there is a compelling
indication.
Thromboembolism
Clinically apparent thromboembolism complicates STEMI in 10% of cases, but embolic lesions are found in 20%
of patients in necropsy series, suggesting that thromboembolism is often clinically silent. Thromboembolism is
considered to be an important contributing cause of death in 25% of patients with STEMI who die after admission
to the hospital. Arterial emboli originate from LV mural thrombi, while most pulmonary emboli arise in the leg veins.
Thromboembolism typically occurs in association with large infarcts (especially anterior), CHF, and a LV thrombus
detected by echocardiography. The incidence of arterial embolism from a clot originating in the ventricle at the site
of an infarction is small but real. Two-dimensional echocardiography reveals LV thrombi in about one-third of
patients with anterior wall infarction but in few patients with inferior or posterior infarction. Arterial embolism often
presents as a major complication, such as hemiparesis when the cerebral circulation is involved or hypertension if
the renal circulation is compromised. When a thrombus has been clearly demonstrated by echocardiographic or
other techniques or when a large area of regional wall motion abnormality is seen even in the absence of a
detectable mural thrombus, systemic anticoagulation should be undertaken (in the absence of contraindications),
as the incidence of embolic complications appears to be markedly lowered by such therapy. The appropriate
duration of therapy is unknown, but 36 months is probably prudent.
Left Ventricular Aneurysm
The term ventricular aneurysm is usually used to describe dyskinesis or local expansile paradoxical wall motion.
Normally functioning myocardial fibers must shorten more if stroke volume and cardiac output are to be
maintained in patients with ventricular aneurysm; if they cannot, overall ventricular function is impaired. True
aneurysms are composed of scar tissue and neither predispose to nor are associated with cardiac rupture.
The complications of LV aneurysm do not usually occur for weeks to months after STEMI; they include CHF,

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

24/29

2/4/2015
arterial embolism, and ventricular arrhythmias. Apical aneurysms are the most common and the most easily
detected by clinical examination. The physical finding of greatest value is a double, diffuse, or displaced apical
impulse. Ventricular aneurysms are readily detected by two-dimensional echocardiography, which may also reveal
a mural thrombus in an aneurysm.
Rarely, myocardial rupture may be contained by a local area of pericardium, along with organizing thrombus and
hematoma. Over time, this pseudoaneurysm enlarges, maintaining communication with the LV cavity through a
narrow neck. Because a pseudoaneurysm often ruptures spontaneously, it should be surgically repaired if
recognized.
Postinfarction Risk Stratication and Management
Many clinical and laboratory factors have been identified that are associated with an increase in cardiovascular risk
after initial recovery from STEMI. Some of the most important factors include persistent ischemia (spontaneous or
provoked), depressed LV ejection fraction (<40%), rales above the lung bases on physical examination or
congestion on chest radiograph, and symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias. Other features associated with
increased risk include a history of previous MI, age >75, diabetes mellitus, prolonged sinus tachycardia,
hypotension, ST-segment changes at rest without angina ("silent ischemia"), an abnormal signal-averaged ECG,
nonpatency of the infarct-related coronary artery (if angiography is undertaken), and persistent advanced heart
block or a new intraventricular conduction abnormality on the ECG. Therapy must be individualized on the basis of
the relative importance of the risk(s) present.
The goal of preventing reinfarction and death after recovery from STEMI has led to strategies to evaluate risk after
infarction. In stable patients, submaximal exercise stress testing may be carried out before hospital discharge to
detect residual ischemia and ventricular ectopy and to provide the patient with a guideline for exercise in the early
recovery period. Alternatively, or in addition, a maximal (symptom-limited) exercise stress test may be carried out
46 weeks after infarction. Evaluation of LV function is usually warranted as well. Recognition of a depressed LV
ejection fraction by echocardiography or radionuclide ventriculography identifies patients who should receive
medications to inhibit the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Patients in whom angina is induced at relatively
low workloads, those who have a large reversible defect on perfusion imaging or a depressed ejection fraction,
those with demonstrable ischemia, and those in whom exercise provokes symptomatic ventricular arrhythmias
should be considered at high risk for recurrent MI or death from arrhythmia (Fig. 245-6). Cardiac catheterization
with coronary angiography and/or invasive electrophysiologic evaluation is advised.
Exercise tests also aid in formulating an individualized exercise prescription, which can be much more vigorous in
patients who tolerate exercise without any of the above-mentioned adverse signs. In addition, predischarge stress
testing may provide an important psychological benefit, building the patient's confidence by demonstrating a
reasonable exercise tolerance.
In many hospitals, a cardiac rehabilitation program with progressive exercise is initiated in the hospital and
continued after discharge. Ideally, such programs should include an educational component that informs patients
about their disease and its risk factors.
The usual duration of hospitalization for an uncomplicated STEMI is about 5 days. The remainder of the
convalescent phase may be accomplished at home. During the first 12 weeks, the patient should be encouraged
to increase activity by walking about the house and outdoors in good weather. Normal sexual activity may be
resumed during this period. After 2 weeks, the physician must regulate the patient's activity on the basis of
exercise tolerance. Most patients will be able to return to work within 24 weeks.

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

25/29

2/4/2015

Secondary Prevention
Various secondary preventive measures are at least partly responsible for the improvement in the long-term
mortality and morbidity rates after STEMI. Long-term treatment with an antiplatelet agent (usually aspirin) after
STEMI is associated with a 25% reduction in the risk of recurrent infarction, stroke, or cardiovascular mortality (36
fewer events for every 1000 patients treated). An alternative antiplatelet agent that may be used for secondary
prevention in patients intolerant of aspirin is clopidogrel (75 mg orally daily). ACE inhibitors or ARBs and, in
appropriate patients, aldosterone antagonists should be used indefinitely by patients with clinically evident heart
failure, a moderate decrease in global ejection fraction, or a large regional wall motion abnormality to prevent late
ventricular remodeling and recurrent ischemic events.
The chronic routine use of oral beta-adrenoceptor blockers for at least two years after STEMI is supported by well-
conducted, placebo-controlled trials.
Evidence suggests that warfarin lowers the risk of late mortality and the incidence of reinfarction after STEMI. Most
physicians prescribe aspirin routinely for all patients without contraindications and add warfarin for patients at
increased risk of embolism (see "Thromboembolism" above). Several studies suggest that in patients <75 years a
low dose of aspirin (7581 mg/d) in combination with warfarin administered to achieve an INR>2.0 is more
effective than aspirin alone for preventing recurrent MI and embolic cerebrovascular accident. However, there is an
increased risk of bleeding and a high rate of discontinuation of warfarin that has limited clinical acceptance of
combination antithrombotic therapy. There is increased risk of bleeding when warfarin is added to dual antiplatelet
therapy (aspirin and clopidogrel). However, patients who have had a stent implanted and have an indication for
anticoagulation should receive dual antiplatelet therapies in combination with warfarin. Such patients should also
receive a proton pump inhibitor to minimize the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and should have regular monitoring
of their hemoglobin levels and stool hematest while on combination antithrombotic therapy.
Finally, risk factors for atherosclerosis (Chap. 224) should be discussed with the patient, and, when possible,
favorably modified.
Further Readings
Antman EM: ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction: Management, in: P Libby, RO Bonow, DL Mann, DP Zipes (eds)
Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, 8th ed, Philadelphia, Saunders Elsevier, 2008,
pp 12331299 
: Time is muscle: Translation into practice. J Am Coll Cardiol 52:1216, 2008 
Braunwald E, Antman EM: ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction: Pathology, Pathophysiology, and Clinical Features in
P Libby, RO Bonow, DL Mann, DP Zipes (eds) Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine,
8th ed, Philadelphia, Saunders Elsevier, 2008, pp 12071232 
Jacobs AK et al: Development of systems of care for ST-elevation myocardial infarction patients: executive
summary. Circulation 116:217, 2007  [PubMed: 17538045] 
Kushner FG et al: 2009 Focused Updates: ACC/AHA Guidelines for the Management of Patients With ST-Elevation
Myocardial Infarction (updating the 2004 Guideline and 2007 Focused Update) and ACC/AHA/SCAI Guidelines on
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (updating the 2005 Guideline and 2007 Focused Update): A report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
Circulation 120:2271, 2009  [PubMed: 19923169] 
Lloyd-Jones D et al: Heart disease and stroke statistics2009 update: A report from the American Heart
Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Circulation 119:e21, 2009 
Mehran R et al: Bivalirudin in patients undergoing Primary angioplasty for acute myocardial infarction (HORIZONS-

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

26/29

2/4/2015
AMI): 1-year results of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 374:1149, 2009  [PubMed: 19717185] 
White HD, Chew DP: Acute myocardial infarction. Lancet 372:570, 2008  [PubMed: 18707987] 
Wiviott SD et al: Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med 357:2001,
2007  [PubMed: 17982182] 

Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC.

All rights reserved.

Your IP address is 146.203.126.89

Acute coronary syndromes. Following disruption of a vulnerable plaque, patients experience ischemic discomfort
resulting from a reduction of flow through the affected epicardial coronary artery. The flow reduction may be
caused by a completely occlusive thrombus (right) or subtotally occlusive thrombus (left). Patients with ischemic
discomfort may present with or without ST-segment elevation. Of patients with ST-segment elevation, the majority
(wide red arrow) ultimately develop a Q wave on the ECG (QwMI), while a minority (thin red arrow) do not develop
Q wave and, in older literature, were said to have sustained a non-Q-wave MI (NQMI). Patients who present
without ST-segment elevation are suffering from either unstable angina or a non-ST-segment elevation MI
(NSTEMI) (wide green arrows), a distinction that is ultimately made on the presence or absence of a serum cardiac
marker such as CKMB or a cardiac troponin detected in the blood. The majority of patients presenting with
NSTEMI do not develop a Q wave on the ECG; a minority develop a QwMI (thin green arrow). (Adapted from CW
Hamm et al: Lancet 358:1533, 2001, and MJ Davies: Heart 83:361, 2000; with permission from the BMJ Publishing
Group.)
The zone of necrosing myocardium is shown at the top of the figure, followed in the middle portion of the figure by
a diagram of a cardiomyocyte that is in the process of releasing biomarkers. The biomarkers that are released into
the interstitium are first cleared by lymphatics followed subsequently by spillover into the venous system. After
disruption of the sarcolemmal membrane of the cardiomyocyte, the cytoplasmic pool of biomarkers is released first
(left-most arrow in bottom portion of figure). Markers such as myoglobin and CK isoforms are rapidly released, and
blood levels rise quickly above the cutoff limit; this is then followed by a more protracted release of biomarkers
from the disintegrating myofilaments that may continue for several days. Cardiac troponin levels rise to about 20 to
50 times the upper reference limit (the 99th percentile of values in a reference control group) in patients who have a
"classic" acute myocardial infarction (MI) and sustain sufficient myocardial necrosis to result in abnormally elevated
levels of the MB fraction of creatine kinase (CKMB). Clinicians can now diagnose episodes of microinfarction by
sensitive assays that detect cardiac troponin elevations above the upper reference limit, even though CKMB levels
may still be in the normal reference range (not shown). CV = coefficient of variation. (Modified from Antman EM:
Decision making with cardiac troponin tests. N Engl J Med 346:2079, 2002 and Jaffe AS, Babiun L, Apple FS:
Biomarkers in acute cardiac disease: The present and the future. J Am Coll Cardiol 48:1, 2006.)
Major components of time delay between onset of symptoms from STEMI and restoration of flow in the
infarct-related artery. Plotted sequentially from left to right are the times for patients to recognize symptoms and
seek medical attention, transportation to the hospital, in-hospital decision making, implementation of reperfusion
strategy, and restoration of flow once the reperfusion strategy has been initiated. The time to initiate fibrinolytic
therapy is the "door-to-needle" (D-N) time; this is followed by the period of time required for pharmacologic
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

27/29

2/4/2015
restoration of flow. More time is required to move the patient to the catheterization laboratory for a percutaneous
coronary interventional (PCI) procedure, referred to as the "door-to-balloon" (D-B) time, but restoration of flow in
the epicardial infarctrelated artery occurs promptly after PCI. At the bottom is a variety of methods for speeding
the time to reperfusion along with the goals for the time intervals for the various components of the time delay.
(Adapted from CP Cannon et al: J Thromb Thrombol 1:27, 1994.)
Options for transportation of patients with STEMI and initial reperfusion treatment. Patient transported by EMS
after calling 911: Reperfusion in patients with STEMI can be accomplished by the pharmacologic (fibrinolysis) or
catheter-based (primary PCI) approaches. Implementation of these strategies varies based on the mode of
transportation of the patient and capabilities at the receiving hospital. Transport time to the hospital is variable
from case to case, but the goal is to keep total ischemic time within 120 min. There are three possible scenarios:
(1) If EMS has fibrinolytic capability and the patient qualifies for therapy, prehospital fibrinolysis should be started
within 30 min of EMS arrival on scene. (2) If EMS is not capable of administering prehospital fibrinolysis and the
patient is transported to a non-PCI-capable hospital, the hospital door-to-needle time should be within 30 min for
patients in whom fibrinolysis is indicated. (3) If EMS is not capable of administering prehospital fibrinolysis and the
patient is transported to a PCI-capable hospital, the hospital door-to-balloon time should be within 90 min.
Interhospital transfer: It is also appropriate to consider emergency interhospital transfer of the patient to a PCI-
capable hospital for mechanical revascularization if: (1) there is a contraindication to fibrinolysis, (2) PCI can be
initiated promptly (within 90 minutes after the patient presented to the initial receiving hospital or within 60 min
compared to when fibrinolysis with a fibrin-specific agent could be initiated at the initial receiving hospital), (3)
fibrinolysis is administered and is unsuccessful (i.e., "rescue PCI"). Secondary nonemergency interhospital transfer
can be considered for recurrent ischemia. Patient self-transport: Patient self-transportation is discouraged. If the
patient arrives at a non-PCI-capable hospital, the door-to-needle time should be within 30 min. If the patient
arrives at a PCI-capable hospital, the door-to-balloon time should be within 90 min. The treatment options and
time recommended after first hospital arrival are the same. [Adapted with permission from Antman et al: ACC/AHA
guidelines for the management of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: A report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee to Revise the
1999 Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction). Circulation 110:e82, 2004.]
Each community and each facility in that community should have an agreed-upon plan for how STEMI patients are
to be treated that includes which hospitals should receive STEMI patients from EMS units capable of obtaining
diagnostic ECGs, management at the initial receiving hospital, and written criteria and agreements for expeditious
transfer of patients from non-PCI-capable facilities. Patients initially seen at a PCI-capable facility (left side of
diagram) should be sent promptly to the cardiac catheterization laboratory with the intent to perform primary PCI.
Patients initially seen at a non-PCI-capable facility (right side of diagram) should rapidly be assessed for the
optimum reperfusion therapy (see box in top right corner for assessment criteria). This may include transfer for
primary PCI or initial treatment with a fibrinolytic. Following administration of a fibrinolytic, management is dictated
by the patient's overall risk for death/serious complications of STEMI, and whether or not they experience
recurrent ischemic symptoms or left-ventricular failure (see the two boxes at the bottom right of diagram). [Adapted
from Kushner FG et al: 2009 focused update of the ACC/AHA Guidelines for the Management of Patients with ST-
Elevation Myocardial Infarction (updating the 2004 guideline and 2007 focused update): a report of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation
120:2271, 2009.]
Algorithm for assessment of need for implantation of a cardioverter/defibrillator. The appropriate
management is selected based upon measurement of left ventricular ejection fraction and assessment of the
NYHA functional class. Patients with depressed left ventricular function at least 40 days post-STEMI are referred
for insertion of an implantable cardioverter/defibrillator (ICD) if the LVEF is <3040% and they are in NYHA class II
III or if the LVEF is <3035% and they are in NYHA class I functional status. Patients with preserved left ventricular
http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023
28/29

2/4/2015
function (LVEF >40%) do not receive an ICD regardless of NYHA functional class. All patients are treated with
medical therapy post-STEMI. [Adapted from data contained in Zipes DP, et al: ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for
management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death; a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force and the European Society of Cardiology
Committee for Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for Management of Patients with
Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death). J Am Coll Cardiol 48:1064, 2006.]

http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=331&sectionid=40727023

29/29


